 
 
 
 
 
 
 Document 
 
 
 Table of Contents UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. ____________ Form-K ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION OR (d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF For the fiscal year ended September, Commission file number - Rockwell Automation, Inc. (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) Delaware - (State or other jurisdiction of (I.R.S. Employer incorporation or organization) Identification No.) South nd Street Milwaukee, Wisconsin (Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code) Registrants telephone number, including area code: + ()- Securities registered pursuant to Section(b) of the Act : Title of each class Name of each exchange on which registered Common Stock, $ Par Value New York Stock Exchange Securities registered pursuant to Section(g) of the Act: None Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule of the Securities Act. Yes No Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section or Section (d) of the Act. Yes No Indicate by check mark whether the registrant ()has filed all reports required to be filed by Section or (d) of the Securities Exchange Act of during the preceding months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and ()has been subject to such filing requirements for the past days. Yes No Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule of RegulationS-T during the preceding months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). Yes No Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in PartIII of this Form -K or any amendment to this Form -K. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, and emerging growth company in Rule b- of the Exchange Act. (Check one): LargeAcceleratedFiler AcceleratedFiler Non-accelerated Filer SmallerReportingCompany Emerging Growth Company If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section (a) of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Ruleb- of the Act). Yes No The aggregate market value of registrants voting stock held by non-affiliates of registrant on March, was approximately $. billion . ,, shares of registrants Common Stock, par value $ per share, were outstanding on October, . DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE Certain information contained in the Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Shareowners of registrant to be held on February, is incorporated by reference into PartIII hereof. Table of Contents PART I Page Item. Business ItemA. Risk Factors ItemB. Unresolved Staff Comments Item. Properties Item. Legal Proceedings Item . Mine Safety Disclosures ItemA. Executive Officers of the Company PART II Item. Market for the Companys Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item. Selected Financial Data Item. Managements Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ItemA. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Item. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF SHAREOWNERS EQUITY NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Item. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure ItemA. Controls and Procedures ItemB. Other Information PART III Item. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Item. Executive Compensation Item. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Item. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence Item. Principal Accountant Fees and Services PART IV Item. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule Item . Form -K Summary SIGNATURES Table of Contents PART I FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS This Annual Report contains statements (including certain projections and business trends) that are forward-looking statements as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of . Words such as believe, estimate, project, plan, expect, anticipate, will, intend and other similar expressions may identify forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ materially from those projected as a result of certain risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, including but not limited to: macroeconomic factors, including global and regional business conditions, the availability and cost of capital, commodity prices, the cyclical nature of our customers capital spending, sovereign debt concerns and currency exchange rates; laws, regulations and governmental policies affecting our activities in the countries where we do business, including those related to tariffs, taxation, and trade controls; the successful development of advanced technologies and demand for and market acceptance of new and existing hardware and software products; the availability and price of components and materials; the successful execution of our cost productivity initiatives; the availability, effectiveness and security of our information technology systems; competitive hardware and software products, solutions and services and pricing pressures, and our ability to provide high quality products, solutions and services; disruptions to our distribution channels or the failure of distributors to develop and maintain capabilities to sell our products; a disruption of our business due to natural disasters, pandemics, acts of war, strikes, terrorism, social unrest or other causes; our ability to manage and mitigate the risk related to security vulnerabilities and breaches of our products, solutions and services; intellectual property infringement claims by others and the ability to protect our intellectual property; the uncertainty of claims by taxing authorities in the various jurisdictions where we do business; our ability to attract, develop, and retain qualified personnel; the uncertainties of litigation, including liabilities related to the safety and security of the hardware and software products, solutions and services we sell; our ability to manage and mitigate the risks associated with our solutions and services businesses; the successful integration and management of acquired businesses and technologies; risks associated with our investment in common stock of PTC Inc., including the potential for volatility in our reported quarterly earnings associated with changes in the market value of such stock; our ability to manage costs related to employee retirement and health care benefits; and other risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those detailed from time to time in our Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)filings. These forward-looking statements reflect our beliefs as of the date of filing this report. We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. See ItemA. Risk Factors for more information. Item. Business General Rockwell Automation, Inc. (Rockwell Automation or the Company), a leader in industrial automation and information, makes its customers more productive and the world more sustainable . Our hardware and software products, solutions and services are designed to meet our customers needs to reduce total cost of ownership, maximize asset utilization, improve time to market and reduce enterprise business risk. The Company continues the business founded as the Allen-Bradley Company in . The privately-owned Allen-Bradley Company was a leading North American manufacturer of industrial automation equipment when the former Rockwell International Corporation (RIC)purchased it in . The Company was incorporated in Delaware in connection with a tax-free reorganization completed on December, , pursuant to which we divested our former aerospace and defense businesses (the AD Business) to The Boeing Company (Boeing). In the Table of Contents reorganization, RIC contributed all of its businesses, other than the AD Business, to the Company and distributed all capital stock of the Company to RICs shareowners. Boeing then acquired RIC. As used herein, the terms we, us, our, Rockwell Automation or the Company include subsidiaries and predecessors unless the context indicates otherwise. Information included in this Annual Report on Form -K refers to our continuing businesses unless otherwise indicated. Whenever an Item of this Annual Report on Form -K refers to information in our Proxy Statement for our Annual Meeting of Shareowners to be held on February, (the Proxy Statement), or to information under specific captions in Item. Managements Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MDA), or in Item. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data (the Financial Statements), the information is incorporated in that Item by reference. All date references to years and quarters refer to our fiscal year and quarters unless otherwise stated. Operating Segments We have two operating segments: Architecture Software and Control Products Solutions. Both operating segments share a common sales organization and supply chain and conduct business globally. Major markets served by both segments consist of consumer industries, including food and beverage, home and personal care and life sciences; transportation, including automotive and tire; and heavy industries, including oil and gas, mining, metals, and chemicals. Geographic Information We do business in more than countries around the world. The largest sales outside the United States on a country-of-destination basis are in China, Canada, Mexico, Italy, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Brazil. See ItemA. Risk Factors for a discussion of risks associated with our global operations. Competition Our competitors range from large diversified corporations that may also have business interests outside of industrial automation to smaller companies that offer a limited portfolio of industrial automation products, solutions and services. Factors that influence our competitive position include the breadth of our product portfolio and scope of solutions, technology differentiation, domain expertise, installed base, distribution network, quality of hardware and software products, solutions and services, global presence and price. Major competitors include Siemens AG, ABB Ltd, Schneider Electric SA, Emerson Electric Co., Mitsubishi Electric Corp. and Honeywell International Inc. Distribution In most countries, we sell primarily through independent distributors in conjunction with our direct sales force. In other countries, we sell through a combination of our direct sales force and to a lesser extent, through independent distributors. Approximately percent of our global sales are through independent distributors. Sales to our largest distributor in , and were approximately percent of our total sales. Employees At September, , we had approximately , employees. Approximately , were employed in the United States. Raw Materials We purchase a wide range of equipment, components, finished products and materials used in our business. The raw materials essential to the manufacture of our products generally are available at competitive prices. We have a broad base of suppliers and subcontractors. We depend upon the ability of our suppliers and subcontractors to meet performance and quality specifications and delivery schedules. See ItemA. Risk Factors for a discussion of risks associated with our reliance on third party suppliers. Table of Contents Backlog Our total order backlog consists of (in millions): September , Architecture Software $ . $ . Control Products Solutions ,. ,. $ ,. $ ,. Backlog is not necessarily indicative of results of operations for future periods due to the short-cycle nature of most of our sales activities. Backlog orders scheduled beyond were approximately $ million as of September, . Environmental Protection Requirements Information about the effect of compliance with environmental protection requirements and resolution of environmental claims is contained in Note in the Financial Statements. See ItemA. Risk Factors for a discussion of risks associated with liabilities and costs related to environmental remediation. Patents, Licenses and Trademarks We own or license numerous patents and patent applications related to our hardware and software products and operations. While in the aggregate our patents and licenses are important in the operation of our business, we do not believe that loss or termination of any one of them would materially affect our business or financial condition. Various claims of patent infringement and requests for patent indemnification have been made to us. We believe that none of these claims or requests will have a material adverse effect on our financial condition. See ItemA. Risk Factors for a discussion of risks associated with our intellectual property. The Companys name and its registered trademark Rockwell Automation and other trademarks such as Allen-Bradley , A-B and PlantPAx Process Automation System are important to both of our business segments. In addition, we own other important trademarks that we use, such as PowerFlex for our AC drives, and Rockwell Software and FactoryTalk for our software offerings. Seasonality Our business segments are not subject to significant seasonality. However, the calendarization of our results can vary and may be affected by the seasonal spending patterns of our customers due to their annual budgeting processes and their working schedules. Available Information We maintain a website at https://www.rockwellautomation.com . Our annual reports on Form -K, quarterly reports on Form -Q, current reports on Form -K and any amendments to such reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section (a) or (d) of the Securities Exchange Act of (the Exchange Act), as well as our annual reports to shareowners and Section reports on Forms , and , are available free of charge on this site through the Investors link as soon as reasonably practicable after we file or furnish these reports with the SEC. All reports we file with the SEC are also available free of charge via EDGAR through the SECs website at https://www.sec.gov . Our Guidelines on Corporate Governance and charters for our Board committees are also available on our website. The information contained on and linked from our website is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form -K. Table of Contents ItemA. Risk Factors In the ordinary course of our business, we face various strategic, operating, compliance and financial risks. These risks could have an impact on our business, financial condition, operating results and cash flows. Our most significant risks are set forth below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form -K. Our Enterprise Risk Management (ERM)process seeks to identify and address significant risks. Our ERM process assesses, manages, and monitors risks consistent with the integrated risk framework in Internal Control Integrated Framework () issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). We believe that risk-taking is an inherent aspect of the pursuit of our strategy. Our goal is to manage risks prudently rather than avoid risks. We can mitigate risks and their impact on the Company only to a limited extent. A team of senior executives prioritizes identified risks and assigns an executive to address each major identified risk area and lead action plans to manage risks. Our Board of Directors provides oversight of the ERM process and reviews significant identified risks. The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors also reviews significant financial risk exposures and the steps management has taken to monitor and manage them. Our other Board committees also play a role in risk management, as set forth in their respective charters. Our goal is to proactively manage risks in a structured approach in conjunction with strategic planning, with the intent to preserve and enhance shareowner value. However, the risks set forth below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form -K and other risks and uncertainties could adversely affect us and cause our results to vary materially from recent results or from our anticipated future results. Adverse changes in business or industry conditions and volatility and disruption of the capital and credit markets may result in decreases in our sales and profitability. We are subject to macroeconomic cycles and when recessions occur, we may experience reduced, canceled or delayed orders, payment delays or defaults, supply chain disruptions or other factors as a result of the economic challenges faced by our customers, prospective customers and suppliers. Demand for our hardware and software products is sensitive to changes in levels of industrial production and the financial performance of major industries that we serve. As economic activity slows, credit markets tighten, or sovereign debt concerns arise, companies tend to reduce their levels of capital spending, which could result in decreased demand for our products. Our ability to access the credit markets and the costs of borrowing are affected by the strength of our credit rating and current market conditions. If our access to credit, including the commercial paper market, is adversely affected by a change in market conditions or otherwise, our cost of borrowings may increase or our ability to fund operations may be reduced. We sell to customers around the world and are subject to the risks of doing business in many countries. We do business in more than countries around the world. Approximately percent of our sales in were to customers outside the U.S. In addition, many of our manufacturing operations, suppliers and employees are located in many places around the world. The future success of our business depends in large part on growth in our sales in non-U.S. markets. Our global operations are subject to numerous financial, legal and operating risks, such as political and economic instability; prevalence of corruption in certain countries; enforcement of contract and intellectual property rights; and compliance with existing and future laws, regulations and policies, including those related to exports, imports, tariffs, embargoes and other trade restrictions, investments, taxation, product content and performance, employment and repatriation of earnings. In addition, we are affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates, inflation rates and interest rates. The occurrence or consequences of these risks may make it more difficult to operate our business and increase our costs, which could decrease our profitability and have an adverse effect on our financial condition. An inability to respond to changes in customer preferences could result in decreased demand for our products. Our success depends in part on our ability to anticipate and offer hardware and software products that appeal to the changing needs and preferences of our customers in the various markets we serve. Developing new hardware and software products requires high levels of innovation, and the development process is often lengthy and costly. If we are not able to anticipate, identify, develop and market products that respond to changes in customer preferences and emerging technological and broader industry trends, demand for our products could decline. Table of Contents We rely on suppliers to provide equipment, components and services. Our business requires that we buy equipment, components and services including finished products, electronic components and commodities. Our reliance on suppliers involves certain risks, including: poor quality or an insecure supply chain, which could adversely affect the reliability and reputation of our hardware and software products; changes in the cost of these purchases due to inflation, exchange rate fluctuations, taxes, tariffs, embargoes and other trade restrictions, commodity market volatility or other factors that affect our suppliers; intellectual property risks such as challenges to ownership of rights or alleged infringement by suppliers; and shortages of components, commodities or other materials, which could adversely affect our manufacturing efficiencies and ability to make timely delivery of our products, solutions and services. Any of these uncertainties could adversely affect our profitability and ability to compete. We also maintain several single-source supplier relationships, because either alternative sources are not available or the relationship is advantageous due to performance, quality, support, delivery, capacity, or price considerations. Unavailability of, or delivery delays for single-source components or products could adversely affect our ability to ship the related products in a timely manner. The effect of unavailability or delivery delays would be more severe if associated with our higher volume and more profitable products. Even where substitute sources of supply are available, qualifying alternative suppliers and establishing reliable supplies could cost more or result in delays and a loss of sales. Failures or security breaches of our products, connected services, manufacturing environment, supply chain, or information technology systems could have an adverse effect on our business. We rely heavily on information technology (IT) in our hardware and software products, solutions and services for customers, manufacturing environment, and in our enterprise IT infrastructure. Despite the implementation of security measures, our IT systems are vulnerable to unauthorized access by nation states, hackers, cyber-criminals, malicious insiders, and other actors who may engage in fraud, theft of confidential or proprietary information, or sabotage. These systems could be compromised by malware (including ransomware), cyber attacks, and other events, ranging from widespread, non-targeted, global cyber threats to targeted advanced persistent threats. Given that our hardware and software products and services are used in critical infrastructure, these threats could indicate increased risk for our products, services, manufacturing, and IT infrastructure. Recent global cyber attacks have been perpetuated by compromising software updates in widely-used software products, increasing the risk that vulnerabilities or malicious content could be inserted into our products. In some cases, malware attacks were spread throughout the supply chain, moving from one company to the next via authorized network connections. Our hardware and software products, solutions, and services are used by our direct and indirect customers in applications that may be subject to information theft, tampering, or sabotage. Careless or malicious actors could cause a customers process to be disrupted or could cause equipment to operate in an improper manner that could result in harm to people or property.While we continue to improve the security attributes of our hardware and software products, solutions and services, we can reduce risk, not eliminate it.To a significant extent, the security of our customers systems depends on how those systems are designed, installed, protected, configured, updated and monitored, much of which are typically outside our control. Our business uses IT resources on a dispersed, global basis for a wide variety of functions including development, engineering, manufacturing, sales, accounting, and human resources.Our vendors, partners, employees and customers have access to, and share, information across multiple locations via various digital technologies. In addition, we rely on partners and vendors for a wide range of outsourced activities, including cloud providers, are part of our internal IT infrastructure and our commercial offerings. Secure connectivity is important to these ongoing operations. Also, our partners and vendors frequently have access to our confidential information as well as confidential information about our customers, employees, and others. We design our security architecture to reduce the risk that a compromise of our partners infrastructure, for example a cloud platform, could lead to a compromise of our internal systems or customer networks, but this risk cannot be eliminated and vulnerabilities at third parties could result in unknown risk exposure to our business. The current cyber threat environment indicates increased risk for all companies, including those in industrial automation and information. Like other global companies, we have experienced cyber threats and incidents, although none have been material or had a material adverse effect on our business or financial condition. Our information security efforts, under the leadership of our Chief Information Security Officer and Chief Product Security Officer, with the support of the entire management team, include major programs designed to address security governance, product security, identification and protection of critical assets, insider risk, third-party risk, and cyber defense operations. We believe these measures reduce, but cannot eliminate, the risk of an information Table of Contents security incident. Any significant security incidents could have an adverse impact on sales, harm our reputation and cause us to incur legal liability and increased costs to address such events and related security concerns. There are inherent risks in our solutions and services businesses. Risks inherent in the sale of solutions and services include assuming greater responsibility for successfully delivering projects that meet a particular customer specification, including defining and controlling contract scope, efficiently executing projects, and managing the performance and quality of our subcontractors and suppliers. If we are unable to manage and mitigate these risks, we could incur cost overruns, liabilities and other losses that would adversely affect our results of operations. New legislative and regulatory actions could adversely affect our business. Legislative and regulatory action may be taken in the various countries and other jurisdictions where we operate that may affect our business activities in these countries or may otherwise increase our costs to do business. For example, we are increasingly required to comply with various environmental and other material, product, certification and labeling laws and regulations. Our customers may also be required to comply with such legislative and regulatory requirements. These requirements could increase our costs and could potentially have an adverse effect on our ability to do business in certain jurisdictions. Changes in these requirements could impact demand for our hardware and software products, solutions and services. Compliance with increasing privacy regulation, such as the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), could increase our operating costs as part of our efforts to protect and safeguard our sensitive data and personal information. Failure to maintain information privacy could result in legal liability or reputational harm. Our industry is highly competitive. We face strong competition in all of our market segments in several significant respects. We compete based on breadth and scope of our hardware and software product portfolio and solution and service offerings, technology differentiation, the domain expertise of our employees and partners, product performance, quality of our hardware and software products, solutions and services, knowledge of integrated systems and applications that address our customers business challenges, pricing, delivery and customer service. The relative importance of these factors differs across the geographic markets and product areas that we serve and across our market segments. We seek to maintain acceptable pricing levels across and within geographic markets by continually developing advanced technologies for new hardware and software products and product enhancements and offering complete solutions for our customers business problems. In addition, we continue to drive productivity to reduce our cost structure. If we fail to achieve our objectives, to keep pace with technological changes, or to provide high quality hardware and software products, solutions and services, we may lose business or experience price erosion and correspondingly lower sales and margins. We expect the level of competition to remain high in the future, which could limit our ability to maintain or increase our market share or profitability. We rely on our distribution channel for a substantial portion of our sales. In the United States and Canada, a large percentage of our sales are through distributors. In certain other countries, the majority of our sales are also through a limited number of distributors. We depend on the capabilities and competencies of our distributors to sell our hardware and software products and services and deliver value to our customers. Disruptions to our existing distribution channel or the failure of distributors to maintain and develop the appropriate capabilities to sell our hardware and software products and services could adversely affect our sales. A disruption could result from the sale of a distributor to a competitor, financial instability of a distributor or other events. We face the potential harms of natural disasters, pandemics, acts of war, terrorism, international conflicts or other disruptions to our operations. Our business depends on the movement of people and goods around the world. Natural disasters, pandemics, acts or threats of war or terrorism, international conflicts, power outages, fires, explosions, equipment failures, sabotage, political instability and the actions taken by governments could cause damage to or disrupt our business operations, our suppliers or our customers, and could create economic instability. Disruptions to our IT infrastructure from system failures, shutdowns, power outages, telecommunication or utility failures, and other events, including disruptions at third party IT and other service providers, could also interfere with or disrupt our operations. Although it is not possible to predict such events or their consequences, these events could decrease demand for our hardware and software products, solutions or services, increase our costs, or make it difficult or impossible for us to deliver products, solutions or services. Table of Contents Intellectual property infringement claims of others and the inability to protect our intellectual property rights could harm our business and our customers. Others may assert intellectual property infringement claims against us or our customers. We frequently provide a limited intellectual property indemnity in connection with our terms and conditions of sale to our customers and in other types of contracts with third parties. Indemnification payments and legal expenses to defend claims could be costly. In addition, we own the rights to many patents, trademarks, brand names and trade names that are important to our business. The inability to enforce our intellectual property rights may have an adverse effect on our results of operations. Expenses related to enforcing our intellectual property rights could be significant. Claims from taxing authorities could have an adverse effect on our income tax expense and financial condition. We conduct business in many countries, which requires us to interpret and comply with the income tax laws and rulings in each of those taxing jurisdictions. Due to the ambiguity of tax laws among those jurisdictions as well as the uncertainty of how underlying facts may be construed, our estimates of income tax liabilities may differ from actual payments or assessments. We must successfully defend any claims from taxing authorities to avoid an adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. Our business success depends on attracting, developing, and retaining highly qualified personnel. Our success depends in part on the efforts and abilities of our management team and key employees. Their skills, experience and industry knowledge significantly benefit our operations and performance. Difficulty attracting, developing, and retaining members of our management team and key employees, including employees with the necessary technological expertise, could have a negative effect on our business, operating results and financial condition. Potential liabilities and costs from litigation (including asbestos claims and environmental remediation) could reduce our profitability. Various lawsuits, claims and proceedings have been or may be asserted against us relating to the conduct of our business, including those pertaining to the safety and security of the hardware and software products, solutions and services we sell, employment, contract matters, and environmental remediation. We have been named as a defendant in lawsuits alleging personal injury as a result of exposure to asbestos that was used in certain of our products many years ago. Our products may also be used in hazardous industrial activities, which could result in product liability claims. The uncertainties of litigation (including asbestos claims) and the uncertainties related to the collection of insurance proceeds make it difficult to predict the ultimate resolution. Our operations are subject to various environmental regulations that are concerned with human health, the limitation and control of emissions and discharges into the air, ground, and water, the quality of air and bodies of water, and the handling, use and disposal of specified substances. Our financial responsibility to clean up contaminated property or for natural resource damages may extend to previously owned or used properties, waterways and properties owned by unrelated companies or individuals, as well as properties that we currently own and use, regardless of whether the contamination is attributable to prior owners. We have been named as a potentially responsible party at cleanup sites and may be so named in the future, and the costs associated with these current and future sites may be significant. We have, from time to time, divested certain of our businesses. In connection with these divestitures, certain lawsuits, claims and proceedings may be instituted or asserted against us related to the period that we owned the businesses, either because we agreed to retain certain liabilities related to these periods or because such liabilities fall upon us by operation of law. In some instances, the divested business has assumed the liabilities; however, it is possible that we might be responsible for satisfying those liabilities if the divested business is unable to do so. Table of Contents Failure to identify, manage, complete, and integrate acquisitions and technology investments may adversely affect our business. As part of our strategy, we may pursue acquisitions of or investment opportunities in businesses as well as the purchase of technology from third parties. In order to be successful with these transactions, we must identify attractive acquisition or investment opportunities, successfully complete the transaction, and manage post-closing matters, such as integration of the acquired business or technology. We may not be able to identify or complete beneficial acquisition or transaction opportunities given the intense competition for them. Even if we successfully identify and complete such transactions, we may not be able to successfully address risks and uncertainties inherent in such transactions, including: difficulties in integrating the purchased operations, technologies, products or services, retaining the acquired business customers and achieving the expected benefits of the acquisition, such as sales increases, access to technologies, cost savings and increases in geographic or product presence, in the desired time frames; loss of key employees of the acquired business; legal and compliance issues; difficulties implementing and maintaining consistent standards, controls, procedures, policies and information systems; and diversion of managements attention from other business concerns. Future acquisitions and technology investments could result in debt, dilution, liabilities, increased interest expense, restructuring charges, and impairment and amortization expenses related to intangible assets. We own common stock in PTC Inc. and are exposed to the volatility, liquidity and other risks inherent in holding that stock. We own common stock of PTC Inc. (PTC), a Nasdaq-listed company, that we acquired for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $. billion. We present this investment on our Consolidated Balance Sheet at its fair value at the end of each reporting period, less a valuation adjustment pending registration of our shares of PTC common stock (Shares) under the Securities Act of , as amended, which, per a registration rights agreement entered into with PTC, must occur no later than July , . The fair value of the Shares is subject to fluctuation in the future due to the volatility of the stock market, changes in general economic conditions, and the performance of PTC. We will recognize all changes in the fair value of the Shares (whether realized or unrealized) as gains or losses in our Consolidated Statement of Operations. Accordingly, changes in the fair value of the Shares can materially impact the earnings we report, which introduces volatility in our earnings that is not associated with the results of our business operations. In particular, significant declines in the fair value of the Shares would produce significant declines in our reported earnings. While there is an established trading market for shares of PTC common stock, there are limitations on our ability to dispose of some or all of the Shares should we wish to reduce our investment. Until approximately July , , we are subject to contractual restrictions on our ability to transfer the Shares, subject to certain exceptions. In addition, we are subject to certain restrictions on our ability to transfer the Shares under the securities laws. Further, the reported value of our Shares does not necessarily reflect their lowest current market price. If we were forced to sell some or all the Shares in the market, there can be no assurance that we will be able to sell them at prices equivalent to the value of the Shares that we have reported on our Consolidated Balance Sheet, and we may be forced to sell them at significantly lower prices. Finally, our equity position in PTC is a minority position which exposes us to further risk as we are not able to exert control over PTC. Increasing employee benefit costs could have a negative effect on our operating results and financial condition. One important aspect of attracting and retaining qualified personnel is continuing to offer competitive employee retirement and health care benefits. The expenses we record for our pension and other postretirement benefit plans depend on factors such as changes in market interest rates, the value of plan assets, mortality assumptions and healthcare trend rates. Significant unfavorable changes in these factors would increase our expenses. Expenses related to employer-funded healthcare benefits depend on laws and regulations, which could change, as well as healthcare cost inflation. An inability to control costs related to employee and retiree benefits could negatively impact our operating results and financial condition. Table of Contents ItemB. Unresolved Staff Comments None. Item. Properties We operate manufacturing facilities in the United States and multiple other countries. Manufacturing space occupied approximately . million square feet, of which percent was in the United States and Canada. Our global headquarters are located in Milwaukee, Wisconsin in a facility that we own. We lease the remaining facilities noted below. Most of our facilities are shared by operations in both segments and may be used for multiple purposes such as administrative, manufacturing, warehousing and / or distribution. The following table sets forth information regarding our headquarter locations as of September, : Location Segment/Region Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States Global Headquarters and Control Products Solutions Mayfield Heights, Ohio, United States Architecture Software Cambridge, Canada Canada Capelle, Netherlands / Diegem, Belgium Europe, Middle East and Africa Hong Kong Asia Pacific Weston, Florida, United States Latin America The following table sets forth information regarding the manufacturing square footage of our principal locations as of September , : Location Manufacturing Square Footage Monterrey, Mexico , Aarau, Switzerland , Twinsburg, Ohio, United States , Mequon, Wisconsin, United States , Tecate, Mexico , Cambridge, Canada , Shanghai, China , Richland Center, Wisconsin, United States , Harbin, China , Katowice, Poland , Ladysmith, Wisconsin, United States , Jundiai, Brazil , Singapore , There are no major encumbrances (other than financing arrangements, which in the aggregate are not significant) on any of our plants or equipment. In our opinion, our properties have been well maintained, are in sound operating condition and contain all equipment and facilities necessary to operate at present levels. Table of Contents Item. Legal Proceedings The information required by this Item is contained in Note in the Financial Statements within the section entitled Other Matters . Item . Mine Safety Disclosures Not applicable. ItemA. Executive Officers of the Company The name, age, office and position held with the Company and principal occupations and employment during the past five years of each of the executive officers of the Company as of November , are: Name, Office and Position, and Principal Occupations and Employment Age Blake D. Moret Chairman of the Board since January , , and President and Chief Executive Officer since July , ; previously Senior Vice President Sujeet Chand Senior Vice President and Chief Technology Officer Theodore D. Crandall Senior Vice President since February , ; previously Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer David M. Dorgan Vice President and Controller Steven W. Etzel Vice President and Treasurer Elik I. Fooks Senior Vice President since March , ; previously Vice President and General Manager, Sensing, Safety, and Connectivity Business Patrick P. Goris Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer since February , ; previously Vice President, Finance, Architecture and Software and (from -) Operations and Engineering Services, and (from July ) Vice President, Investor Relations Rebecca W. House Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary since January , ; previously Assistant General Counsel, Operations and Compliance, and Assistant Secretary at Harley-Davidson, Inc. (motorcycle manufacturer) Frank C. Kulaszewicz Senior Vice President Michael Laszkiewicz Senior Vice President, Operations and Engineering Services since July , ; previously Vice President and General Manager, Power Control Business John P. McDermott Senior Vice President John M. Miller Vice President and Chief Intellectual Property Counsel Robert B. Murphy Senior Vice President, Connected Enterprise Consulting since July , ; previously Senior Vice President, Operations and Engineering Services (from May - July ) and Vice President, Manufacturing Operations Christopher Nardecchia Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer since November , ; previously Vice President and Chief Information Officer, Global Operations and Supply Chain, Amgen, Inc. (biopharmaceutical company) Francis S. Wlodarczyk Senior Vice President since July , ; previously Vice President, Control and Visualization Business (from - ) and Director, Product Businesses, EMEA There are no family relationships, as defined by applicable SEC rules, between any of the above executive officers and any other executive officer or director of the Company. No officer of the Company was selected pursuant to any arrangement or understanding between the officer and any person other than the Company. All executive officers are elected annually. Table of Contents PART II Item. Market for the Companys Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Market Information Our common stock, $ par value, is listed on the New York Stock Exchange and trades under the symbol ROK. On October, , there were , shareowners of record of our common stock. Company Purchases The table below sets forth information with respect to purchases made by or on behalf of us of shares of our common stock during the three months ended September, : Period Total Number of Shares Purchased () Average PricePaid PerShare () TotalNumber of Shares Purchased as PartofPublicly Announced Plans or Programs MaximumApprox. Dollar Value of Shares that May Yet Be Purchased Under the Plans or Programs () July , , $ . , $ ,, August , , . , ,, September , , . , ,,, Total ,, . ,, () All of the shares purchased during the quarter ended September, were acquired pursuant to the repurchase programs described in () below, except for shares that were acquired in August in connection with stock swap exercises of employee stock options. () Average price paid per share includes brokerage commissions. () On January , , the Board of Directors authorized us to expend $. billion to repurchase shares of our common stock. On September , , the Board of Directors authorized us to expend an additional $. billion to repurchase shares of our common stock. Our repurchase programs allow us to repurchase shares at management's discretion or at our brokers discretion pursuant to a share repurchase plan subject to price and volume parameters. Table of Contents Performance Graph The following information is not deemed to be soliciting material or to be filed with the SEC or subject to Regulation A or C under the Securities Exchange Act of , as amended (Exchange Act) or to the liabilities of Section of the Exchange Act, and will not be deemed to be incorporated by reference into any filing of the Company under the Securities Act of , as amended, or the Exchange Act, except to the extent the Company specifically incorporates it by reference into such a filing. The following line graph compares the cumulative total shareowner return on our Common Stock against the cumulative total return of the SP Composite- Stock Index and the SP Electrical Components Equipment (SP Electrical CE) Index for the period of five fiscal years from October , to September , , assuming in each case a fixed investment of $ at the respective closing prices on September , and reinvestment of all dividends. The cumulative total returns on Rockwell Automation Common Stock and each index as of each September, through plotted in the above graph are as follows: Rockwell Automation* $ . $ . $ . $ . $ . $ . SP Index . . . . . . SP Electrical Components Equipment . . . . . . Cash dividends per common share . . . . . . * Includes the reinvestment of all dividends in our Common Stock. Table of Contents Item. Selected Financial Data The following table sets forth selected consolidated financial data of our continuing operations. The data should be read in conjunction with MDA and the Financial Statements. The selected financial data below has been derived from our audited consolidated financial statements. Year Ended September, (in millions, except per share data) Consolidated Statement of Operations Data: Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Interest expense . . . . . Net income () . . . . . Earnings per share: Basic . . . . . Diluted . . . . . Cash dividends per share . . . . . Consolidated Balance Sheet Data: (at end of period) Total assets $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt . . . . Long-term debt ,. ,. ,. ,. . Shareowners equity ,. ,. ,. ,. ,. Other Data: Capital expenditures $ . $ . $ . $ . $ . Depreciation . . . . . Intangible asset amortization . . . . . () During the fourth quarter of fiscal , we sold a product distribution business within our Control Products Solutions segment. This business held no intellectual property and included products sold outside of our core channel and under different brands. We sold this business for approximately $ million and recorded a pre-tax gain of $. million, which is included within Other income (expense) in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. During fiscal , we recorded a gain of $ million due to a change in fair value of our investment in PTC, which is included within Other income (expense) in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. During fiscal , we recorded charges of $. million associated with the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of (the "Tax Act"). Refer to Notes and in the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our investment in PTC and the effect of the Tax Act, respectively on our financial condition and results of operations. Table of Contents Item. Managements Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Results of Operations Non-GAAP Measures The following discussion includes organic sales, total segment operating earnings and margin, Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS, Adjusted Effective Tax Rate and free cash flow, which are non-GAAP measures. See Supplemental Sales Information for a reconciliation of reported sales to organic sales and a discussion of why we believe this non-GAAP measure is useful to investors. See Results of Operations for a reconciliation of income before income taxes to total segment operating earnings and margin and a discussion of why we believe these non-GAAP measures are useful to investors. See Results of Operations for a reconciliation of income from continuing operations, diluted EPS from continuing operations and effective tax rate to Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate, respectively, and a discussion of why we believe these non-GAAP measures are useful to investors. See Financial Condition for a reconciliation of cash flows from operating activities to free cash flow and a discussion of why we believe this non-GAAP measure is useful to investors. Overview Rockwell Automation, Inc., a leader in industrial automation and information, makes its customers more productive and the world more sustainable . Overall demand for our hardware and software products, solutions and services is driven by: investments in manufacturing, including upgrades, modifications and expansions of existing facilities or production lines and new facilities or production lines; investments in basic materials production capacity, which may be related to commodity pricing levels; our customers needs for faster time to market, lower total cost of ownership, improved asset utilization and optimization, and enterprise risk management; our customers needs to continuously improve quality, safety and sustainability; industry factors that include our customers new product introductions, demand for our customers products or services and the regulatory and competitive environments in which our customers operate; levels of global industrial production and capacity utilization; regional factors that include local political, social, regulatory and economic circumstances; and the spending patterns of our customers due to their annual budgeting processes and their working schedules. Long-term Strategy Our strategy is to bring The Connected Enterprise to life. We integrate control and information across the enterprise to help industrial companies and their people be more productive. Our vision of being the most valued global provider of innovative industrial automation and information hardware and software products, solutions and services is supported by our growth and performance strategy, which seeks to: achieve organic sales growth in excess of the automation market by expanding our served market and strengthening our competitive differentiation; diversify our sales streams by broadening our portfolio of hardware and software products, solutions and services, expanding our global presence and serving a wider range of industries and applications; grow market share by gaining new customers and by capturing a larger share of existing customers spending; enhance our market access by building our channel capability and partner network; acquire companies that serve as catalysts to organic growth by adding complementary technology, expanding our served market, or enhancing our domain expertise or market access; deploy human and financial resources to strengthen our technology leadership and our intellectual capital business model; continuously improve quality and customer experience; and drive annual cost productivity. By implementing the above strategy, we seek to achieve our long-term financial goals, including above-market organic sales growth, EPS growth above sales growth, return on invested capital in excess of percent and free cash flow equal to about percent of Adjusted Income. We expect acquisitions to add a percentage point or more per year to long-term sales growth. Table of Contents Our customers face the challenge of remaining globally cost competitive and automation can help them achieve their productivity and sustainability objectives. Our value proposition is to help our customers reduce time to market, lower total cost of ownership, improve asset utilization and manage enterprise risks. Differentiation through Technology Innovation and Domain Expertise We seek a technology leadership position in industrial automation. We believe that our three platforms - integrated architecture, intelligent motor control and solutions and services - provide the foundation for a long-term sustainable competitive advantage. Our integrated control and information architecture, with Logix at its core, is an important differentiator. We are the only automation provider that can support discrete, process, batch, safety, motion and power control on the same hardware platform with the same software programming environment. Our integrated architecture is scalable with standard open communications protocols making it easier for customers to implement it more cost effectively. Our software portfolio, combined with the software made available as a result of our strategic alliance with PTC, is the most comprehensive and flexible information platform in the industry. Through the combination of this technology and our domain expertise we help customers to achieve additional productivity benefits, such as reduced unplanned downtime, improved energy efficiency, higher quality and increased throughput yield. Intelligent motor control is one of our core competencies and an important aspect of an automation system. These products and solutions enhance the availability, efficiency and safe operation of our customers' critical and most energy-intensive plant assets. Our intelligent motor control offering can be integrated seamlessly with the Logix architecture. Domain expertise refers to the industry and application knowledge required to deliver solutions and services that support customers through the entire life cycle of their automation investment. The combination of industry-specific domain expertise of our people with our innovative technologies enables us to help our customers solve their manufacturing and business challenges. Global Expansion As the manufacturing world continues to expand, we must be able to meet our customers needs around the world. Approximately percent of our employees and percent of our sales are outside the U.S. We continue to expand our footprint in emerging markets. As we expand in markets with considerable growth potential and shift our global footprint, we expect to continue to broaden the portfolio of hardware and software products, solutions and services that we provide to our customers in these regions. We have made significant investments to globalize our manufacturing, product development and customer-facing resources in order to be closer to our customers throughout the world. The emerging markets of Asia Pacific, including China and India, Latin America, Central and Eastern Europe and Africa are projected to be the fastest growing over the long term, due to higher levels of infrastructure investment and the growing middle-class population. We believe that increased demand for consumer products in these markets will lead to manufacturing investment and provide us with additional growth opportunities in the future. Enhanced Market Access Over the past decade, our investments in technology and globalization have enabled us to expand our addressed market to over $ billion. Our process initiative has been the most important contributor to this expansion and remains our largest growth opportunity. Logix is the technology foundation that enabled us to become an industry leader for process applications. We complement that with a growing global network of engineers and partners to provide solutions to process customers. Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) represent another area of addressed market expansion and an important growth opportunity. To remain competitive, OEMs need to find the optimal balance of machine cost and performance while reducing their time to market. Our scalable integrated architecture and intelligent motor control offerings, along with design productivity tools and our motion and safety products, can assist OEMs in addressing these business needs. We have developed a powerful network of channel partners, technology partners and commercial partners that act as amplifiers to our internal capabilities and enable us to serve our customers needs around the world. Table of Contents Broad Range of Industries Served We apply our knowledge of manufacturing applications to help customers solve their business challenges. We serve customers in a wide range of industries, including consumer products, heavy industries and transportation. Our consumer products customers are engaged in the food and beverage, home and personal care, and life sciences industries. These customers needs include new capacity, incremental capacity from existing facilities, flexible manufacturing and regulatory compliance. These customers operate in an environment where product innovation and time to market are critical factors. We serve customers in heavy industries, including oil and gas, mining, aggregates, cement, metals, energy, semiconductor, chemicals, pulp and paper and water/wastewater. Companies in resource-based industries typically invest in capacity expansion when commodity prices are relatively high and global demand for basic materials is increasing. In addition, there is ongoing investment in upgrades of aging automation systems and productivity. In the transportation industry, factors such as geographic expansion, investment in new model introductions, including electric vehicles, and more flexible manufacturing technologies influence customers automation investment decisions. Our sales in transportation are primarily to automotive and tire manufacturers. All of these industries also generate maintenance repair order (MRO) and ongoing services revenue related to the installed base. Outsourcing and Sustainability Trends Demand for our hardware and software products, solutions and services across all industries benefits from the outsourcing and sustainability needs of our customers. Customers increasingly desire to outsource engineering services to achieve a more flexible cost base. Our manufacturing application knowledge enables us to serve these customers globally. We help our customers meet their sustainability needs pertaining to energy efficiency, environmental and safety goals. Customers across all industries are investing in more energy-efficient manufacturing processes and technologies, such as intelligent motor control, and energy-efficient solutions and services. In addition, environmental and safety objectives often spur customers to invest to ensure compliance and implement sustainable business practices. Acquisitions and Investments Our acquisition and investment strategy focuses on hardware and software products, solutions and services that will be catalytic to the organic growth of our core offerings. In , we made several investments, including in PTC. PTC is the leader in the Industrial Internet of Things and augmented reality. Our investment in and alliance with PTC will accelerate growth for both companies and enable us to be the partner of choice for customers around the world who want to transform their physical operations with digital technology. The result will be an unmatched integrated information solution that will enable customers to achieve increased productivity, heightened plant efficiency, reduced operational risk and better system interoperability. In November , we acquired Odos Imaging Limited, a Scottish technology company that provides three-dimensional, time-of-flight sensing systems for industrial imaging applications. This acquisition enables us to expand our existing capabilities by bringing -D time-of-flight sensor technology to industrial applications. In September , we acquired Maverick Technologies, a leading systems integrator. This acquisition significantly enhances our expertise in key process and batch applications that help our customers realize greater productivity and improved global competitiveness through process control and information management solutions. In September , we acquired Automation Control Products, a premier provider in centralized thin client, remote desktop and server management software. This acquisition strengthens our ability to provide our customers with visual display and software solutions to manage information and streamline workflows for a more connected manufacturing environment. In March , we acquired MagneMotion Inc., a leading manufacturer of intelligent conveying systems. This acquisition continues our strategy to build a portfolio of smart manufacturing technologies by expanding our existing capabilities in independent cart technology. We believe these acquisitions and investments will help us expand our served market and deliver value to our customers. Table of Contents Continuous Improvement Productivity and continuous improvement are important components of our culture. We have programs in place that drive ongoing process improvement, functional streamlining, material cost savings and manufacturing productivity. Our implementation of common global processes and an enterprise-wide business system is nearly complete. These are intended to improve profitability that can be used to fund investments in growth and to offset inflation. Our ongoing productivity initiatives target both cost reduction and improved asset utilization. Charges for workforce reductions and facility rationalization may be required in order to effectively execute our productivity programs. Table of Contents U. S. Industrial Economic Trends In , sales in the U.S. accounted for approximately percent of our total sales. The various indicators we use to gauge the direction and momentum of our served U.S. markets include: The Industrial Production (IP) Index, published by the Federal Reserve, which measures the real output of manufacturing, mining, and electric and gas utilities. The IP Index is expressed as a percentage of real output in a base year, currently . Historically there has been a meaningful correlation between the changes in the IP Index and the level of automation investment made by our U.S. customers in their manufacturing base. The Manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index (PMI), published by the Institute for Supply Management (ISM), which indicates the current and near-term state of manufacturing activity in the U.S. According to the ISM, a PMI measure above indicates that the U.S. manufacturing economy is generally expanding while a measure below indicates that it is generally contracting. Industrial Equipment Spending, compiled by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, which provides insight into spending trends in the broad U.S. industrial economy. This measure over the longer term has proven to demonstrate a reasonable correlation with our domestic growth. Capacity Utilization (Total Industry), published by the Federal Reserve, which measures plant operating activity. Historically there has been a meaningful correlation between Capacity Utilization and levels of U.S. IP. The table below depicts the trends in these indicators from fiscal to . In the fourth quarter of fiscal , all indicators, except PMI, improved compared to the prior quarter and the same quarter in the prior year. PMI decreased slightly compared to the prior quarter and the same quarter in the prior year, but continues to be significantly above . IP Index PMI Industrial Equipment Spending (in billions) Capacity Utilization (percent) Fiscal quarter ended: September . . . . June . . . . March . . . . December . . . . Fiscal quarter ended: September . . . . June . . . . March . . . . December . . . . Fiscal quarter ended: September . . . . June . . . . March . . . . December . . . . Note: Economic indicators are subject to revisions by the issuing organizations. Table of Contents Non-U.S. Economic Trends In , sales outside the U.S. accounted for approximately percent of our total sales. These customers include both indigenous companies and multinational companies with expanding global presence. In addition to the global factors previously mentioned in the Overview section, international demand, particularly in emerging markets, has historically been driven by the strength of the industrial economy in each region, investments in infrastructure and expanding consumer markets. We use changes in the respective countries' gross domestic product and IP as indicators of the growth opportunities in each region where we do business. Macroeconomic indicators remain favorable in most geographies, although IP and gross domestic product growth rates are projected to slow in . In China, the impact of trade tensions is expected to be partially offset by government stimulus, and solid domestic and foreign demand in India is expected to help support continued manufacturing growth. In Europe, the economy is affected by slowing export growth driven by a strong Euro against emerging market currencies and increasing oil prices. Latin America is expected to continue to benefit from a strong U.S. economy. Growth rates in Canada are expected to be lower in . Table of Contents Summary of Results of Operations In , sales were $,. million , an increase of . percent year over year. Organic sales increased . percent . Currency translation increased sales by . percentage points , and the prior year divestiture reduced sales growth by . percentage points . Growth was broad-based across industries, led by food and beverage, mining, life sciences, and semiconductor. The following is a summary of our results related to key growth initiatives: Logix reported sales increased percent year over year in compared to . Organic sales increased percent year over year, and currency translation increased sales by percentage point. Process initiative reported sales and organic sales increased percent year over year in compared to . Sales in emerging countries increased percent in compared to . Organic sales in emerging countries increased percent year over year. The prior year divestiture reduced sales in emerging countries by percent. Table of Contents The following table reflects our sales and operating results (in millions, except per share amounts): Year Ended September, Sales Architecture Software $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Control Products Solutions ,. ,. ,. Total sales (a) $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Segment operating earnings Architecture Software $ . $ . $ . Control Products Solutions . . . Total segment operating earnings (b) ,. ,. ,. Purchase accounting depreciation and amortization (. ) (. ) (. ) General corporate net (. ) (. ) (. ) Non-operating pension costs (. ) (. ) (. ) Costs related to unsolicited Emerson proposals (. ) Gain on investments . Valuation adjustment pending registration of PTC Shares (. ) Gain on sale of business . Interest expense (. ) (. ) (. ) Income before income taxes (c) ,. ,. . Income tax provision (. ) (. ) (. ) Net income $ . $ . $ . Diluted EPS $ . $ . $ . Adjusted EPS $ . $ . $ . Diluted weighted average outstanding shares . . . Total segment operating margin (b/a) . % . % . % Pre-tax margin (c/a) . % . % . % () See Note in the Financial Statements for the definition of segment operating earnings. () Total segment operating earnings and total segment operating margin are non-GAAP financial measures. We exclude purchase accounting depreciation and amortization, general corporate net, non-operating pension costs, costs related to the unsolicited Emerson proposals in the first quarter of fiscal , gains and losses on investments, valuation adjustment pending registration of PTC Shares, gains and losses from the disposition of businesses, interest expense and income tax provision because we do not consider these costs to be directly related to the operating performance of our segments. We believe that these measures are useful to investors as measures of operating performance. We use these measures to monitor and evaluate the profitability of our operating segments. Our measures of total segment operating earnings and total segment operating margin may be different from measures used by other companies. () During the fourth quarter of fiscal , we sold a product distribution business within our Control Products Solutions segment. This business held no intellectual property and included products sold outside of our core channel and under different brands. We sold this business for approximately $ million and recorded a pre-tax gain of $. million, which is included within Other income (expense) in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. () During fiscal , we recorded charges of $. million associated with the enactment of the Tax Act. Refer to Note in the Financial Statements for further information. () Adjusted EPS is a non-GAAP earnings measure that excludes non-operating pension costs and their related income tax effects. See Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate Reconciliation for more information on this non-GAAP measure. Table of Contents Purchase accounting depreciation and amortization and non-operating pension costs are not allocated to our operating segments because these costs are excluded from our measurement of each segment's operating performance for internal purposes. If we were to allocate these costs, we would attribute them to each of our segments as follows (in millions): Year Ended September , Purchase accounting depreciation and amortization Architecture Software $ . $ . $ . Control Products Solutions . . . Non-operating pension costs Architecture Software . . . Control Products Solutions . . . The decreases in non-operating pension costs in both segments in fiscal were primarily due to a $ million voluntary contribution in fiscal and other actuarial adjustments. The increases in non-operating pension costs in both segments in fiscal were primarily due to the decrease in our U.S. discount rate from . percent for fiscal to . percent for fiscal . Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate Reconciliation Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate are non-GAAP earnings measures that exclude non-operating pension costs, costs related to the unsolicited Emerson proposals in the first quarter of fiscal , gains and losses on investments, and valuation adjustments pending registration of PTC Shares, including their respective tax effects, and the provisional effects of the Tax Act. We believe that Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate provide useful information to our investors about our operating performance and allow management and investors to compare our operating performance period over period. Adjusted EPS is also used as a financial measure of performance for our annual incentive compensation. Our measures of Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate may be different from measures used by other companies. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered a substitute for income from continuing operations, diluted EPS and effective tax rate. Non-operating pension costs include defined benefit plan interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortization of actuarial gains and losses and the impact of any plan curtailments or settlements. These components of net periodic pension cost primarily relate to changes in pension assets and liabilities that are a result of market performance; we consider these and other excluded costs to be unrelated to the operating performance of our business. The following are the components of operating and non-operating pension costs (in millions): Year Ended September , Service cost $ . $ . $ . Amortization of prior service cost (credit) . (. ) (. ) Operating pension costs . . . Interest cost . . . Expected return on plan assets (. ) (. ) (. ) Amortization of net actuarial loss . . . Special termination benefit . . Settlements . . Non-operating pension costs . . . Net periodic pension cost $ . $ . $ . Table of Contents The following are reconciliations of income from continuing operations, diluted EPS from continuing operations and effective tax rate to Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate, respectively (in millions, except per share amounts and percentages): Year Ended September , Income from continuing operations $ . $ . $ . Non-operating pension costs . . . Tax effect of non-operating pension costs (. ) (. ) (. ) Change in fair value of investments (. ) Tax effect of change in fair value of investments . Costs related to unsolicited Emerson proposals . Tax effect of costs related to unsolicited Emerson proposals (. ) Effect of deemed repatriation of foreign earnings due to the Tax Act . Effect of net deferred tax asset revaluation due to the Tax Act . Effect of withholding taxes on previously taxed foreign earnings due to the Tax Act . Adjusted Income $ ,. $ . $ . Diluted EPS from continuing operations $ . $ . $ . Non-operating pension costs . . . Tax effect of non-operating pension costs (. ) (. ) (. ) Change in fair value of investments (. ) Tax effect of change in fair value of investments . Costs related to unsolicited Emerson proposals . Tax effect of costs related to unsolicited Emerson proposals (. ) Effect of deemed repatriation of foreign earnings due to the Tax Act . Effect of net deferred tax asset revaluation due to the Tax Act . Effect of withholding taxes on previously taxed foreign earnings due to the Tax Act . Adjusted EPS $ . $ . $ . Effective tax rate . % . % . % Tax effect of non-operating pension costs . % . % . % Tax effect of costs related to unsolicited Emerson proposals . % % % Tax effect of change in fair value of investments (. )% % % Effect of deemed repatriation of foreign earnings due to the Tax Act (. )% % % Effect of net deferred tax asset revaluation due to the Tax Act (. )% % % Effect of withholding taxes on previously taxed foreign earnings due to the Tax Act (. )% % % Adjusted Effective Tax Rate . % . % . % Includes gain on investments and valuation adjustment pending registration of PTC Shares and the related tax effects. The Tax Act may require further adjustments as additional guidance from the U.S. Department of Treasury is provided, the Companys assumptions change, or as further information and interpretations become available.Refer to Note in the Financial Statements for further information. Table of Contents Compared to (in millions, except per share amounts) Change Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ . Income before income taxes ,. ,. . Diluted EPS . . (. ) Adjusted EPS . . . Sales Sales in fiscal increased . percent compared to . Organic sales increased . percent . Currency translation increased sales by . percentage points , and the prior year divestiture reduced sales growth by . percentage points . Pricing contributed about half of one percentage point to growth. The table below presents our sales, attributed to the geographic regions based upon country of destination, for the year ended September, and the percentage change from the same period a year ago: Change vs. Change in Organic Sales () vs. (in millions, except percentages) Year Ended September, Year Ended September, Year Ended September, United States $ ,. . % . % Canada . . % . % Europe, Middle East and Africa ,. . % . % Asia Pacific . . % . % Latin America . . % . % Total sales $ ,. . % . % () Organic sales are sales excluding the effect of changes in currency exchange rates, acquisitions and divestitures. See Supplemental Sales Information for information on this non-GAAP measure. Sales in the United States increased year over year, led by strength in heavy industries. Sales in Canada increased year over year, with growth led by the pulp and paper and consumer industries. EMEA sales increased year over year, led by consumer industries. Asia Pacific sales increased year over year, led by heavy industries. Sales in Latin America increased year over year, led by the food and beverage and mining industries. General Corporate - Net General corporate - net expenses were $. million in fiscal compared to $. million in fiscal . Income before Income Taxes Income before income taxes increased percent from $,. million in to $,. million in , primarily due to PTC adjustments, higher sales, and lower restructuring charges, partially offset by the absence of the gain on the divestiture. Total segment operating earnings increased percent year over year from $,. million in to $,. million in , primarily due to higher sales. Table of Contents Income Taxes On December , , the Tax Act was enacted. The Tax Act significantly changes U.S. tax law by, among other things, lowering the statutory corporate income tax rate, implementing a modified territorial tax system, and imposing a one-time transition tax on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries that were previously deferred from U.S. tax ("transition tax"). As a fiscal year taxpayer, certain provisions of the Tax Act impact us in fiscal year , including the change in the federal statutory rate and the transition tax, while other provisions will be effective in fiscal year , including the tax on global intangible low-tax income ("GILTI") of foreign subsidiaries, the deduction for foreign derived intangible income ("FDII"), and the elimination of the domestic manufacturing deduction. The effective tax rate in was . percent compared to . percent in . The increase in the effective tax rate was due to provisional expense related to the transition tax on deemed repatriation of foreign earnings ($. million or . percent), withholding taxes on previously taxed foreign earnings ($. million or . percent), and the revaluation of net deferred tax assets ($. million or . percent). The Adjusted Effective Tax Rate in was . percent compared to . percent in . The decrease in the Adjusted Effective Tax Rate was primarily due to the lower U.S. statutory tax rate under the Tax Act partially offset by lower discrete tax items in the current year. See Note in the Financial Statements for a complete reconciliation of the United States statutory tax rate to the effective tax rate and more information on tax events in and affecting each year's respective tax rates. Architecture Software (in millions, except percentages) Change Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ . Segment operating earnings . . . Segment operating margin . % . % . pts Sales Architecture Software sales increased . percent in compared to . Organic sales increased . percent , and the effects of currency translation increased sales by . percentage points . All regions experienced reported and organic sales growth. The United States was the strongest performing region organically. Logix reported sales increased percent in compared to . Logix organic sales increased percent , and the effects of currency translation increased sales by percentage point. Operating Margin Architecture Software segment operating earnings increased percent . Operating margin was . percent in compared to . percent in , primarily due to higher sales. Control Products Solutions (in millions, except percentages) Change Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ . Segment operating earnings . . . Segment operating margin . % . % . pts Sales Control Products Solutions sales increased . percent in compared to . Organic sales increased . percent , the effects of currency translation increased sales by . percentage points , and the prior year divestiture reduced sales by . percentage points . All regions experienced reported and organic sales growth, except for EMEA. The United States was the strongest performing region. Product sales decreased percent year over year. Product organic sales increased percent, currency translation increased sales by approximately percentage point, and the prior year divestitures reduced sales by approximately percentage points. Table of Contents Sales in our solutions and services businesses increased approximately percent year over year. Organic sales in our solutions and services businesses increased percent during , and currency translation contributed percentage point to sales growth. Operating Margin Control Products Solutions segment operating earnings increased percent year over year. Segment operating margin was . percent in compared to . percent a year ago, primarily due to higher sales. Compared to (in millions, except per share amounts) Change Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ . Income before income taxes ,. . . Diluted EPS . . . Adjusted EPS . . . Sales Sales in fiscal increased . percent compared to . Organic sales increased . percent . Currency translation reduced sales by . percentage points , and acquisitions contributed . percentage points to sales growth. Pricing contributed less than one percentage point to growth. The table below presents our sales, attributed to the geographic regions based upon country of destination, for the year ended September, and the percentage change from the same period in the prior year: Change vs. Change in Organic Sales () vs. (in millions, except percentages) Year Ended September, Year Ended September, Year Ended September, United States $ ,. . % . % Canada . . % . % Europe, Middle East and Africa ,. . % . % Asia Pacific . . % . % Latin America . . % . % Total sales $ ,. . % . % () Organic sales are sales excluding the effect of changes in currency exchange rates and acquisitions. See Supplemental Sales Information for information on this non-GAAP measure. Sales in the United States increased year over year, led by strength in the automotive and consumer industries. Sales in Canada increased year over year, led by the pulp and paper, consumer, and automotive industries. EMEA sales increased year over year, with growth in both emerging and developed countries. Asia Pacific sales increased year over year, with strong growth across the region, particularly within the semiconductor industry. Sales growth in Latin America was mixed with growth led by Mexico, partially offset by declines across the rest of the region. Table of Contents General Corporate - Net General corporate - net expenses were $. million in fiscal compared to $. million in fiscal . Income before Income Taxes Income before income taxes increased percent from $. million in to $,. million in , primarily due to the gain on sale of a business in the fourth quarter and an increase in segment operating earnings. Total segment operating earnings increased percent year over year from $,. million in to $,. million in , primarily due to higher sales, partially offset by higher incentive compensation and restructuring charges. In fiscal , we did not incur expenses related to our primary annual incentive compensation plans, which are based on our company's performance. In fiscal , we recorded approximately $ million related to these plans. Income Taxes The effective tax rate in was . percent compared to . percent in . The Adjusted Effective Tax Rate in was . percent compared to . percent in . The decreases in the effective tax rate and the Adjusted Effective Tax Rate were primarily due to larger favorable discrete tax items in . See Note in the Financial Statements for a complete reconciliation of the United States statutory tax rate to the effective tax rate and more information on tax events in and affecting each year's respective tax rates. Architecture Software (in millions, except percentages) Change Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ . Segment operating earnings . . . Segment operating margin . % . % . pts Sales Architecture Software sales increased . percent in compared to . Organic sales increased . percent, the effects of currency translation reduced sales by . percentage points, and acquisitions contributed . percentage points to sales growth. Pricing contributed approximately one percentage point to sales growth during the year. All regions experienced reported and organic sales growth. The United States was the strongest performing region. Logix reported and organic sales increased percent in compared to . Operating Margin Architecture Software segment operating earnings increased percent. Operating margin was . percent in compared to . percent in , primarily due to higher sales, partially offset by higher incentive compensation and restructuring charges. Table of Contents Control Products Solutions (in millions, except percentages) Change Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ . Segment operating earnings . . (. ) Segment operating margin . % . % (. ) pts Sales Control Products Solutions sales increased . percent in compared to . Organic sales increased . percent, the effect of currency translation reduced sales by . percentage points, and acquisitions contributed . percentage points to sales growth. Pricing did not have a significant impact on sales growth during the year. All regions experienced reported and organic sales growth. The United States and Asia Pacific were the strongest performing regions. Sales in our solutions and services businesses increased percent year over year. Organic sales in our solutions and services businesses increased percent during , and acquisitions contributed percentage points to sales growth. Product sales increased percent year over year. Product organic sales increased percent year over year in , and currency translation reduced sales by approximately percentage point. Operating Margin Control Products Solutions segment operating earnings decreased percent year over year. Segment operating margin was . percent in compared to . percent a year ago, primarily due to higher incentive compensation and restructuring charges, partially offset by higher sales. Table of Contents Financial Condition The following is a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows (in millions): Year Ended September, Cash provided by (used for): Operating activities $ ,. $ ,. $ . Investing activities (. ) (. ) (. ) Financing activities (,. ) (. ) (. ) Effect of exchange rate changes on cash (. ) . (. ) Cash (used for) provided by continuing operations $ (. ) $ (. ) $ . The following table summarizes free cash flow, which is a non-GAAP financial measure (in millions): Year Ended September , Cash provided by continuing operating activities $ ,. $ ,. $ . Capital expenditures (. ) (. ) (. ) Excess income tax benefit from share-based compensation . Free cash flow $ ,. $ . $ . Our definition of free cash flow takes into consideration capital investments required to maintain our businesses' operations and execute our strategy. Cash provided by continuing operating activities adds back non-cash depreciation expense to earnings but does not reflect a charge for necessary capital expenditures. Our definition of free cash flow excludes the operating cash flows and capital expenditures related to our discontinued operations, if any. Operating, investing and financing cash flows of our discontinued operations, if any, are presented separately in our statement of cash flows. In the first quarter of fiscal year , we adopted a new share-based compensation accounting standard that requires the excess income tax benefit from share-based compensation to be classified as an operating, rather than as a financing, cash flow. In previous periods, we added this benefit back to our calculation of free cash flow in order to generally classify cash flows arising from income taxes as operating cash flows. Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year , no adjustment is necessary as this benefit is already included in operating cash flows. In our opinion, free cash flow provides useful information to investors regarding our ability to generate cash from business operations that is available for acquisitions and other investments, service of debt principal, dividends and share repurchases. We use free cash flow, as defined, as one measure to monitor and evaluate our performance, including as a financial measure for our annual incentive compensation. Our definition of free cash flow may differ from definitions used by other companies. Cash provided by operating activities was $,. million for the year ended September, compared to $,. million for the year ended September, . Free cash flow was $,. million for the year ended September, compared to $. million for the year ended September, . The year-over-year increases in cash provided by operating activities and free cash flow were primarily due to a voluntary contribution of $. million to our U.S. qualified pension plan in . We repurchased approximately . million shares of our common stock under our share repurchase program in at a total cost of $. billion . In , we repurchased approximately . million shares of our common stock under our share repurchase program at a total cost of $. million . At September, , there were $. million of outstanding common stock share repurchases recorded in accounts payable that did not settle until . At September, , there were no outstanding common stock share repurchases recorded in accounts payable that did not settle until . Our decision to repurchase shares in will depend on business conditions, free cash flow generation, other cash requirements and stock price. On both January , and September , , the Board of Directors authorized us to expend an additional $. billion to repurchase shares of our common stock. At September, , we had approximately $,. million remaining for share repurchases under our existing board authorizations. See PartII, Item. Market for the Companys Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities , for additional information regarding share repurchases. Table of Contents During fiscal , we repatriated approximately $. billion to the U.S. from our foreign subsidiaries. The repatriated funds were primarily used to repurchase shares of our common stock and fund the investment in PTC. The source of these funds was cash and cash equivalents and from the liquidation of short and long-term investments. At September , , substantially all of our cash, cash equivalents and investments (funds) were held by non-US subsidiaries. Due to the enactment of the Tax Act in the first quarter of fiscal , our previously undistributed foreign earnings were subject to a transition tax of approximately $. million. Accordingly, these funds will not be subject to further U.S. tax if repatriated. Refer to Note in the Financial Statements for further information regarding the effect of the enactment of the Tax Act on our financial condition and results of operations. We expect future uses of cash to include working capital requirements, capital expenditures, additional contributions to our retirement plans, acquisitions of businesses, dividends to shareowners, repurchases of common stock and repayments of debt. We expect capital expenditures in to be about $ million . We expect to fund future uses of cash with a combination of existing cash balances and short-term investments, cash generated by operating activities, commercial paper borrowings or a new issuance of debt or other securities. In addition to cash generated by operating activities, we have access to existing financing sources, including the public debt markets and unsecured credit facilities with various banks. Our short-term debt obligations are primarily comprised of commercial paper borrowings. Commercial paper borrowings outstanding were $. million at September, , with a weighted average interest rate of . percent and weighted average maturity period of days. Commercial paper borrowings outstanding were $. million at September, , with a weighted average interest rate of . percent and weighted average maturity period of days. At September, and , our total current borrowing capacity under our unsecured revolving credit facility expiring in March was $. billion . We can increase the aggregate amount of this credit facility by up to $. million , subject to the consent of the banks in the credit facility. We have not borrowed against this credit facility during the years ended September, or . In December , we amended the financial covenant under this credit facility. The previous financial covenant, which limited our debt-to-total-capital ratio to percent, was replaced with a minimum EBITDA-to-interest ratio of . to .. The EBITDA-to-interest ratio is defined in the amendment as the ratio of consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the amendment) for the preceding four quarters to consolidated interest expense for the same period. We believe the new covenant provides us greater financial flexibility. Separate short-term unsecured credit facilities of approximately $. million at September, were available to non-U.S. subsidiaries. Borrowings under our non-U.S. credit facilities at September, and September, were not significant. We were in compliance with all covenants under our credit facilities at September, and September, . Additional information related to our credit facilities is included in Note in the Financial Statements. Among other uses, we can draw on our credit facility as a standby liquidity facility to repay our outstanding commercial paper as it matures. This access to funds to repay maturing commercial paper is an important factor in maintaining the short-term credit ratings set forth in the table below. Under our current policy with respect to these ratings, we expect to limit our other borrowings under our credit facility, if any, to amounts that would leave enough credit available under the facility so that we could borrow, if needed, to repay all of our then outstanding commercial paper as it matures. The following is a summary of our credit ratings as of September, : Credit Rating Agency Short Term Rating Long Term Rating Outlook Standard Poors A- A Stable Moodys P- A Stable Fitch Ratings F A Stable Our ability to access the commercial paper market, and the related costs of these borrowings, is affected by the strength of our credit ratings and market conditions. We have not experienced any difficulty in accessing the commercial paper market to date. If our access to the commercial paper market is adversely affected due to a change in market conditions or otherwise, we would expect to rely on a combination of available cash and our unsecured committed credit facility to provide short-term funding. In such event, the cost of borrowings under our unsecured committed credit facility could be higher than the cost of commercial paper borrowings. Table of Contents We regularly monitor the third-party depository institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. We diversify our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments among counterparties to minimize exposure to any one of these entities. Our emphasis is primarily on safety and liquidity of principal and secondarily on maximizing yield on those funds. We use foreign currency forward exchange contracts to manage certain foreign currency risks. We enter into these contracts to hedge our exposure to foreign currency exchange rate variability in the expected future cash flows associated with certain third-party and intercompany transactions denominated in foreign currencies forecasted to occur within the next two years. We also use these contracts to hedge portions of our net investments in certain non-U.S. subsidiaries against the effect of exchange rate fluctuations on the translation of foreign currency balances to the U.S. dollar. In addition, we use foreign currency forward exchange contracts that are not designated as hedges to offset transaction gains or losses associated with some of our assets and liabilities resulting from intercompany loans or other transactions with third parties that are denominated in currencies other than our entities' functional currencies. Our foreign currency forward exchange contracts are usually denominated in currencies of major industrial countries. We diversify our foreign currency forward exchange contracts among counterparties to minimize exposure to any one of these entities. Cash dividends to shareowners were $. million in ( $. per common share), $. million in ( $. per common share) and $. million in ( $. per common share). Our quarterly dividend rate as of September, is $. per common share ( $. per common share annually), which is determined at the sole discretion of our Board of Directors. A summary of our projected contractual cash obligations at September, is as follows (in millions): Payments by Period Total Thereafter Long-term debt and interest (a) $ ,. $ . $ . $ . $ . $ . $ ,. Minimum operating lease payments . . . . . . . Postretirement benefits (b) . . . . . . . Pension funding contribution (c) . . Purchase obligations (d) . . . . . . . Other long-term liabilities (e) . . Transition tax (f) . . . . . . . Unrecognized tax benefits (g) . Total $ ,. $ . $ . $ . $ . $ . $ ,. (a) The amounts for long-term debt assume that the respective debt instruments will be outstanding until their scheduled maturity dates. The amounts include interest but exclude the amounts to be paid or received under interest rate swap contracts, including the $. million fair value adjustment recorded for the interest rate swap contracts at September, and the unamortized discount of $. million at September, . See Note in the Financial Statements for more information regarding our long-term debt. (b) Our postretirement benefit plans are unfunded and are subject to change. Amounts reported are estimates of future benefit payments, to the extent estimable. (c) Amounts reported for pension funding contributions reflect current estimates of known commitments. Contributions to our pension plans beyond will depend on future investment performance of our pension plan assets, changes in discount rate assumptions and governmental regulations in effect at the time. Amounts subsequent to are excluded from the summary above, as we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of these amounts. The minimum contribution for our U.S. pension plan as required by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)is currently zero. We may make additional contributions to this plan at the discretion of management. (d) This item includes contractual commitments for capital expenditures, certain materials purchases and long-term obligations under agreements with various service providers. Table of Contents (e) Other long-term liabilities include environmental remediation costs, conditional asset retirement obligations and indemnification liabilities. Amounts subsequent to are excluded from the summary above, as we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of when the liabilities will be paid. (f) Under the Tax Act, the Company may elect to pay the transition tax interest-free over eight years, with % due in each of the first five years, % in year six, % in year seven, and % in year eight. See Note in the Financial Statements for further discussion of the transition tax. (g) Amount for unrecognized tax benefits includes accrued interest and penalties. We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of when the liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits will be settled or paid. Supplemental Sales Information We translate sales of subsidiaries operating outside of the United States using exchange rates effective during the respective period. Therefore, changes in currency exchange rates affect our reported sales. Sales by acquired businesses also affect our reported sales. We believe that organic sales, defined as sales excluding the effects of changes in currency exchange rates and acquisitions, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, provides useful information to investors because it reflects regional and operating segment performance from the activities of our businesses without the effect of changes in currency exchange rates and acquisitions. We use organic sales as one measure to monitor and evaluate our regional and operating segment performance. We determine the effect of changes in currency exchange rates by translating the respective periods sales using the same currency exchange rates that were in effect during the prior year. When we acquire businesses, we exclude sales in the current period for which there are no comparable sales in the prior period. When we divest a business, we exclude sales in the prior period for which there are no comparable sales in the current period. Organic sales growth is calculated by comparing organic sales to reported sales in the prior year, excluding divestitures. We attribute sales to the geographic regions based on the country of destination. The following is a reconciliation of our reported sales by geographic region to organic sales (in millions): Year Ended September, Year Ended September, Sales Effect of Changes in Currency Sales Excluding Changes in Currency Effect of Acquisitions Organic Sales Sales Effect of Divestitures Sales Excluding Divestitures United States $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. $ $ ,. $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. Canada . (. ) . . . (. ) . Europe, Middle East and Africa ,. (. ) ,. ,. ,. ,. Asia Pacific . (. ) . . . . Latin America . . . . . (. ) . Total Company Sales $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. $ $ ,. $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. Year Ended September, Year Ended September, Sales Effect of Changes in Currency Sales Excluding Changes in Currency Effect of Acquisitions Organic Sales Sales Effect of Divestitures Sales Excluding Divestitures United States $ ,. $ . $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. $ ,. $ $ ,. Canada . (. ) . (. ) . . . Europe, Middle East and Africa ,. . ,. (. ) ,. ,. ,. Asia Pacific . . . (. ) . . . Latin America . . . (. ) . . . Total Company Sales $ ,. $ . $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. $ ,. $ $ ,. Table of Contents The following is a reconciliation of our reported sales by operating segment to organic sales (in millions): Year Ended September, Year Ended September, Sales Effect of Changes in Currency Sales Excluding Changes in Currency Effect of Acquisitions Organic Sales Sales Effect of Divestitures Sales Excluding Divestitures Architecture Software $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. $ $ ,. $ ,. $ $ ,. Control Products Solutions ,. (. ) ,. ,. ,. (. ) ,. Total Company Sales $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. $ $ ,. $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. Year Ended September, Year Ended September, Sales Effect of Changes in Currency Sales Excluding Changes in Currency Effect of Acquisitions Organic Sales Sales Effect of Divestitures Sales Excluding Divestitures Architecture Software $ ,. $ . $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. $ ,. $ $ ,. Control Products Solutions ,. . ,. (. ) ,. ,. ,. Total Company Sales $ ,. $ . $ ,. $ (. ) $ ,. $ ,. $ $ ,. Table of Contents Critical Accounting Estimates We believe the following accounting estimates are the most critical to the understanding of our financial statements as they could have the most significant effect on our reported results and require subjective or complex judgments by management. Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and revenues and expenses during the periods reported. These estimates are based on our best judgment about current and future conditions, but actual results could differ from those estimates. Refer to Note in the Financial Statements for information regarding our significant accounting policies. Retirement Benefits Pension Pension costs and obligations are actuarially determined and are influenced by assumptions used to estimate these amounts, including the discount rate and the expected rate of return on plan assets. Changes in any of the assumptions and the amortization of differences between the assumptions and actual experience will affect the amount of pension expense in future periods. Our global pension expense in was $. million compared to $. million in . Approximately percent of our global pension expense relates to our U.S. pension plan. The actuarial assumptions used to determine our U.S. pension expense included the following: discount rate of . percent (compared to . percent for ) and expected rate of return on plan assets of . percent (consistent with ). For our U.S. discount rate will increase to . percent from . percent in . The discount rate was set as of our September measurement date and was determined by modeling a portfolio of bonds that match the expected cash flow of our benefit plans. For our expected rate of return on U.S. plan assets will remain . percent . In estimating the expected return on plan assets, we considered actual returns on plan assets over the long term, adjusted for forward-looking considerations, such as inflation, interest rates, equity performance and the active management of the plans invested assets. We also considered our current and expected mix of plan assets in setting this assumption. The financial markets produced positive returns in . The plans debt securities return was positive. The plans equity securities return was above the expected return range in , as U.S. and international equity returns were positive for the year. The actual return for our portfolio of U.S. plan assets was approximately . percent annualized for the years ended September, , and was approximately . percent annualized for the years ended September, . The target allocations and ranges of long-term expected return for our major categories of U.S. plan assets are as follows: Asset Category Target Allocations Expected Return Equity securities % % % Debt securities % % % Other % % % The changes in our discount rate and return on plan assets have an inverse relationship with our net periodic benefit cost. The change in our discount rate also has an inverse relationship with our projected benefit obligation. The following chart illustrates the estimated change in projected benefit obligation and annual net periodic benefit cost assuming a change of basis points in the key assumptions for our U.S. pension plans (in millions): Pension Benefits Change in Projected Benefit Obligation Change in Net Periodic Benefit Cost () Discount rate $ . $ . Return on plan assets . () Change includes both operating and non-operating pension costs. More information regarding pension benefits is contained in Note in the Financial Statements. Table of Contents Revenue Recognition Customer Incentives We offer various incentive programs that provide distributors and direct sale customers with cash rebates, account credits or additional hardware and software products, solutions and services based on meeting specified program criteria. Customer incentives are recognized as a reduction of sales if distributed in cash or customer account credits. Customer incentives are recognized in cost of sales for additional hardware and software products, solutions and services to be provided. We record accruals at the time of revenue recognition as a current liability within Customer returns, rebates and incentives in our Consolidated Balance Sheet or, where a right of setoff exists, as a reduction of Receivables. Our primary incentive program provides distributors with cash rebates or account credits based on agreed amounts that vary depending on the customer to whom our distributor ultimately sells the product. A critical assumption used in estimating the accrual for this program is the time period from when revenue is recognized to when the rebate is processed. Our estimate is based primarily on historical experience. If the time period were to change by percent, the effect would be an adjustment to the accrual of approximately $. million . More information regarding our revenue recognition and returns, rebates and incentives policies are contained in Note in the Financial Statements. Recent Accounting Pronouncements See Note in the Financial Statements regarding recent accounting pronouncements. Table of Contents ItemA. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk We are exposed to market risk during the normal course of business from changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates. We manage exposure to these risks through a combination of normal operating and financing activities as well as derivative financial instruments in the form of foreign currency forward exchange contracts. We sometimes use interest rate swap contracts to manage the balance of fixed and floating rate debt. Foreign Currency Risk We are exposed to foreign currency risks that arise from normal business operations. These risks include the translation of local currency balances of foreign subsidiaries, transaction gains and losses associated with intercompany loans with foreign subsidiaries and transactions denominated in currencies other than a locations functional currency. Our objective is to minimize our exposure to these risks through a combination of normal operating activities and the use of foreign currency forward exchange contracts. Contracts are usually denominated in currencies of major industrial countries. The fair value of our foreign currency forward exchange contracts is an asset of $. million and a liability of $. million at September, . We enter into these contracts with major financial institutions that we believe to be creditworthy. We do not enter into derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes. In , the relative weakening of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies had a favorable impact on our sales and results of operations. In , the relative strengthening of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies had an unfavorable impact on our sales and results of operations. While future changes in foreign currency exchange rates are difficult to predict, our sales and profitability may be adversely affected if the U.S. dollar strengthens relative to levels. Certain of our locations have assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than their functional currencies. We enter into foreign currency forward exchange contracts to offset the transaction gains or losses associated with some of these assets and liabilities. For such assets and liabilities without offsetting foreign currency forward exchange contracts, a percent adverse change in the underlying foreign currency exchange rates would reduce our pre-tax income by approximately $. million . We record all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value regardless of the purpose for holding them. The use of foreign currency forward exchange contracts allows us to manage transactional exposure to exchange rate fluctuations as the gains or losses incurred on these contracts will offset, in whole or in part, losses or gains on the underlying foreign currency exposure. Derivatives that are not designated as hedges for accounting purposes are adjusted to fair value through earnings. For derivatives that are hedges, depending on the nature of the hedge, changes in fair value are either offset by changes in the fair value of the hedged assets, liabilities or firm commitments through earnings or recognized in other comprehensive loss until the hedged item is recognized in earnings. We recognize the ineffective portion of a derivatives change in fair value in earnings immediately. There was no impact on earnings due to ineffective hedges in or . A hypothetical percent adverse change in underlying foreign currency exchange rates associated with the hedged exposures and related contracts would not be significant to our financial condition or results of operations. Interest Rate Risk In addition to existing cash balances and cash provided by normal operating activities, we use a combination of short-term and long-term debt to finance operations. We are exposed to interest rate risk on certain of these debt obligations. Our short-term debt obligations are primarily comprised of commercial paper borrowings. Commercial paper borrowings outstanding were $. million at September, , with a weighted average interest rate of . percent and weighted average maturity period of days. Commercial paper borrowings outstanding were $. million at September, , with a weighted average interest rate of . percent and weighted average maturity period of days. We have issued, and anticipate continuing to issue, additional short-term commercial paper obligations as needed. Changes in market interest rates on commercial paper borrowings affect our results of operations. A hypothetical basis point increase in average market interest rates related to our short-term debt would not be significant to our results of operations or financial condition. We had outstanding fixed rate long-term debt obligations with a carrying value of $,. million at September, and $,. million at September, . The fair value of this debt was $,. million at September, and $,. million at September, . The potential reduction in fair value on such fixed-rate debt obligations from a hypothetical basis point increase in market interest rates would not be significant to our results of operations or financial condition. We currently have no plans to repurchase our outstanding fixed-rate instruments before their maturity and, therefore, fluctuations in market interest rates would not have an effect on our results of operations or shareowners equity. In February , we entered into interest rate swap contracts, which we designated as fair value hedges. These interest rate swaps effectively converted the $. million aggregate principal amount of our . percent notes payable in March ( Notes) and . percent notes payable in March ( Notes) to floating rate debt, each at a rate based on three-month LIBOR plus a fixed spread. The effective floating interest rates were . percent for the Notes and . percent for the Notes at September, . The fair value of our interest rate swap contracts at September, was a net unrealized loss of $. million . A hypothetical basis point increase in average market interest rates related to our interest rate swaps would not be significant to our results of operations or financial condition. Table of Contents Item. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET (in millions, except per share amounts) September, ASSETS Current assets: Cash and cash equivalents $ . $ ,. Short-term investments . ,. Receivables ,. ,. Inventories . . Other current assets . . Total current assets ,. ,. Property, net . . Goodwill ,. ,. Other intangible assets, net . . Deferred income taxes . . Long-term investments ,. . Other assets . . Total $ ,. $ ,. LIABILITIES AND SHAREOWNERS EQUITY Current liabilities: Short-term debt $ . $ . Current portion of long-term debt . Accounts payable . . Compensation and benefits . . Advance payments from customers and deferred revenue . . Customer returns, rebates and incentives . . Other current liabilities . . Total current liabilities ,. ,. Long-term debt ,. ,. Retirement benefits . . Other liabilities . . Shareowners equity: Common stock ($. par value, shares issued: .) . . Additional paid-in capital ,. ,. Retained earnings ,. ,. Accumulated other comprehensive loss (. ) (,. ) Common stock in treasury, at cost (shares held: , .; , .) (,. ) (,. ) Total shareowners equity ,. ,. Total $ ,. $ ,. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS (in millions, except per share amounts) Year Ended September, Sales Products and solutions $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Services . . . ,. ,. ,. Cost of sales Products and solutions (,. ) (,. ) (,. ) Services (. ) (. ) (. ) (,. ) (,. ) (,. ) Gross profit ,. ,. ,. Selling, general and administrative expenses (,. ) (,. ) (,. ) Other income (expense) (Note ) . . . Interest expense (. ) (. ) (. ) Income before income taxes ,. ,. . Income tax provision (Note ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Net income $ . $ . $ . Earnings per share: Basic $ . $ . $ . Diluted $ . $ . $ . Weighted average outstanding shares: Basic . . . Diluted . . . See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (in millions) Year Ended September, Net income $ . $ . $ . Other comprehensive income (loss): Pension and other postretirement benefit plan adjustments (net of tax expense (benefit) of $., $., and ($.)) . . (. ) Currency translation adjustments (. ) . (. ) Net change in unrealized gains and losses on cash flow hedges (net of tax expense (benefit) of $., ($.), and ($.)) . (. ) (. ) Net change in unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale investments (. ) (. ) Other comprehensive income (loss) . . (. ) Comprehensive income $ . $ ,. $ . See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (in millions) Year Ended September, Operating activities: Net income $ . $ . $ . Adjustments to arrive at cash provided by operating activities: Depreciation . . . Amortization of intangible assets . . . Change in fair value of investments (. ) Share-based compensation expense . . . Retirement benefit expense . . . Pension contributions (. ) (. ) (. ) Deferred income taxes . . (. ) Gain on sale of business (. ) Net loss on disposition of property . . . Excess income tax benefit from share-based compensation (. ) Changes in assets and liabilities, excluding effects of acquisitions and foreign currency adjustments: Receivables (. ) (. ) (. ) Inventories (. ) (. ) . Accounts payable . . . Advance payments from customers and deferred revenue . . . Compensation and benefits . . (. ) Income taxes . (. ) (. ) Other assets and liabilities . (. ) . Cash provided by operating activities ,. ,. . Investing activities: Capital expenditures (. ) (. ) (. ) Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (. ) (. ) (. ) Purchases of investments (,. ) (,. ) (,. ) Proceeds from maturities of investments ,. . . Proceeds from sale of investments . . Proceeds from sale of business . Proceeds from sale of property . . . Cash used for investing activities (. ) (. ) (. ) Financing activities: Net issuance (repayment) of short-term debt . (. ) . Repayment of long-term debt (. ) Cash dividends (. ) (. ) (. ) Purchases of treasury stock (,. ) (. ) (. ) Proceeds from the exercise of stock options . . . Excess income tax benefit from share-based compensation . Other financing activities . Cash used for financing activities (,. ) (. ) (. ) Effect of exchange rate changes on cash (. ) . (. ) (Decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents (. ) (. ) . Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year ,. ,. ,. Cash and cash equivalents at end of year $ . $ ,. $ ,. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF SHAREOWNERS EQUITY (in millions, except per share amounts) Year Ended September, Common stock (no shares issued during years) $ . $ . $ . Additional paid-in capital Beginning balance ,. ,. ,. Income tax benefit from share-based compensation . Share-based compensation expense . . . Shares delivered under incentive plans . . (. ) Ending balance ,. ,. ,. Retained earnings Beginning balance ,. ,. ,. Net income . . . Cash dividends (, $. per share; , $. per share; , $. per share) (. ) (. ) (. ) Ending balance ,. ,. ,. Accumulated other comprehensive loss Beginning balance (,. ) (,. ) (,. ) Other comprehensive income (loss) . . (. ) Ending balance (. ) (,. ) (,. ) Common stock in treasury, at cost Beginning balance (,. ) (,. ) (,. ) Purchases (,. ) (. ) (. ) Shares delivered under incentive plans . . . Ending balance (,. ) (,. ) (,. ) Total shareowners equity $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS . Basis of Presentation and Accounting Policies Rockwell Automation, Inc. (Rockwell Automation or the Company), a leader in industrial automation and information, makes its customers more productive and the world more sustainable . Basis of Presentation Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). Principles of Consolidation The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned and controlled majority-owned subsidiaries. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Investments in affiliates over which we do not have control but exercise significant influence are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. These affiliated companies are not material individually or in the aggregate to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Use of Estimates The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and revenues and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We use estimates in accounting for, among other items, customer returns, rebates and incentives; allowance for doubtful accounts; excess and obsolete inventory; discount valuation of PTC Inc. ("PTC") common stock; share-based compensation; acquisitions; product warranty obligations; retirement benefits; litigation, claims and contingencies, including environmental matters, conditional asset retirement obligations and contractual indemnifications; and income taxes. We account for changes to estimates and assumptions prospectively when warranted by factually-based experience. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned. Product and solution sales consist of industrial automation and information solutions; hardware and software products; and custom-engineered systems. Service sales include multi-vendor customer technical support and repair, asset management and optimization consulting and training. All service sales recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Operations are associated with our Control Products Solutions segment. For approximately percent of our consolidated sales, we record sales when all of the following have occurred: persuasive evidence of a sales agreement exists; pricing is fixed or determinable; collection is reasonably assured; and hardware and software products have been delivered and acceptance has occurred, as may be required according to contract terms, or services have been rendered. Within this category, we will at times enter into arrangements that involve the delivery of multiple hardware and software products and/or the performance of services, such as installation and commissioning. The timing of delivery, though varied based upon the nature of the undelivered component, is generally short-term in nature. For these arrangements, revenue is allocated to each deliverable based on that element's relative selling price, provided the delivered element has value to customers on a standalone basis and, if the arrangement includes a general right of return, delivery or performance of the undelivered items is probable and substantially in our control. Relative selling price is obtained from sources such as vendor-specific objective evidence, which is based on our separate selling price for that or a similar item, or from third-party evidence such as how competitors have priced similar items. If such evidence is not available, we use our best estimate of the selling price, which includes various internal factors such as our pricing strategy and market factors. We recognize substantially all of the remainder of our sales as construction-type contracts using either the percentage-of-completion or completed contract methods of accounting. We record sales relating to these contracts using the percentage-of-completion method when we determine that progress toward completion is reasonably and reliably estimable; we use the completed contract method for all others. Under the percentage-of-completion method, we recognize sales and gross profit as work is performed using the relationship between actual costs incurred and total estimated costs at completion. Under the percentage-of-completion method, we adjust sales and gross profit for revisions of estimated total contract costs or revenue in the period the change is identified. We record estimated losses on contracts when they are identified. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Basis of Presentation and Accounting Policies (Continued) We use contracts and customer purchase orders to determine the existence of a sales agreement. We use shipping documents and customer acceptance, when applicable, to verify delivery. We assess whether the fee is fixed or determinable based on the payment terms associated with the transaction and whether the sales price is subject to refund or adjustment. We assess collectibility based on the creditworthiness of the customer as determined by credit evaluations and analysis, as well as the customers payment history. Shipping and handling costs billed to customers are included in sales and the related costs are included in cost of sales in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Returns, Rebates and Incentives Our primary incentive program provides distributors with cash rebates or account credits based on agreed amounts that vary depending on the customer to whom our distributor ultimately sells the product. We also offer various other incentive programs that provide distributors and direct sale customers with cash rebates, account credits or additional hardware and software products, solutions and services based on meeting specified program criteria. Certain distributors are offered a right to return product, subject to contractual limitations. We record accruals for customer returns, rebates and incentives at the time of revenue recognition based primarily on historical experience. Returns, rebates and incentives are recognized as a reduction of sales if distributed in cash or customer account credits. Rebates and incentives are recognized in cost of sales for additional hardware and software products, solutions and services to be provided. Accruals are reported as a current liability in our Consolidated Balance Sheet or, where a right of setoff exists, as a reduction of accounts receivable. Taxes on Revenue Producing Transactions Taxes assessed by governmental authorities on revenue producing transactions, including sales, value added, excise and use taxes, are recorded on a net basis (excluded from revenue). Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include time deposits, certificates of deposit, and other fixed income securities with original maturities of three months or less at the time of purchase. Receivables We record an allowance for doubtful accounts based on customer-specific analysis and general matters such as current assessments of past due balances and economic conditions. Receivables are recorded net of an allowance for doubtful accounts of $. million at September, and $. million at September, . In addition, receivables are recorded net of an allowance for certain customer returns, rebates and incentives of $. million at September, and $. million at September, . Inventories Inventories are recorded at the lower of cost or market using the first-in, first-out (FIFO)or average cost methods. Market is determined on the basis of estimated realizable values. Investments Investments include time deposits, certificates of deposit, other fixed income securities and equity securities. Investments with original maturities longer than three months at the time of purchase and less than one year from period end are classified as short-term. All other investments are classified as long-term. Fixed income securities meeting the definition of a security are accounted for as available-for-sale and recorded at fair value. Equity securities are recorded at fair value. All other investments are recorded at cost, which approximates fair value. Property Property, including internal-use software, is recorded at cost. We calculate depreciation of property using the straight-line method over to years for buildings and improvements, to years for machinery and equipment and to years for computer hardware and internal-use software. We capitalize significant renewals and enhancements and write off replaced units. We expense maintenance and repairs, as well as renewals of minor amounts. Property acquired during the year that is accrued within accounts payable or other current liabilities at year end is considered to be a non-cash investing activity and is excluded from cash used for capital expenditures in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Capital expenditures of $. million , $. million and $. million were accrued within accounts payable and other current liabilities at September, , and , respectively. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Basis of Presentation and Accounting Policies (Continued) Intangible Assets Goodwill and other intangible assets generally result from business acquisitions. We account for business acquisitions by allocating the purchase price to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their fair values; the excess of the purchase price over the allocated amount is recorded as goodwill. We review goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite useful lives for impairment annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate impairment may be present. Any excess in carrying value over the estimated fair value is charged to results of operations. We perform our annual impairment test during the second quarter of our fiscal year. We amortize certain customer relationships on an accelerated basis over the period of which we expect the intangible asset to generate future cash flows. We amortize all other intangible assets with finite useful lives on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Useful lives assigned range from to years for trademarks, to years for customer relationships, to years for technology and to years for other intangible assets. Intangible assets also include costs of software developed or purchased by our software business to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed. Amortization of these computer software products is calculated on a product-by-product basis as the greater of (a)the unamortized cost at the beginning of the year times the ratio of the current year gross revenue for a product to the total of the current and anticipated future gross revenue for that product or (b)the straight-line amortization over the remaining estimated economic life of the product. Impairment of Long-Lived Assets We evaluate the recoverability of the recorded amount of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the recorded amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. Impairment is assessed when the undiscounted expected future cash flows derived from an asset are less than its carrying amount. If we determine that an asset is impaired, we measure the impairment to be recognized as the amount by which the recorded amount of the asset exceeds its fair value. We report assets to be disposed of at the lower of the recorded amount or fair value less cost to sell. We determine fair value using a discounted future cash flow analysis. Derivative Financial Instruments We use derivative financial instruments in the form of foreign currency forward exchange contracts to manage certain foreign currency risks. We enter into these contracts to hedge our exposure to foreign currency exchange rate variability in the expected future cash flows associated with certain third-party and intercompany transactions denominated in foreign currencies forecasted to occur within the next two years. We also use these contracts to hedge portions of our net investments in certain non-U.S. subsidiaries against the effect of exchange rate fluctuations on the translation of foreign currency balances to the U.S. dollar. Additionally, we use derivative financial instruments in the form of interest rate swap contracts to manage our borrowing costs of certain long-term debt. We designate and account for these derivative financial instruments as hedges under U.S. GAAP. Furthermore, we use foreign currency forward exchange contracts that are not designated as hedges to offset transaction gains or losses associated with some of our assets and liabilities resulting from intercompany loans or other transactions with third parties that are denominated in currencies other than our entities' functional currencies. It is our policy to execute such instruments with global financial institutions that we believe to be creditworthy and not to enter into derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes. Foreign currency forward exchange contracts are usually denominated in currencies of major industrial countries. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Basis of Presentation and Accounting Policies (Continued) Fair Value of Financial Instruments We record various financial instruments recorded at fair value. U.S. GAAP defines fair value as the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (exit price) in an orderly transaction between market participants in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability. U.S. GAAP also classifies the inputs used to measure fair value into the following hierarchy: Level : Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Level : Quoted prices in active markets for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, or inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability. Level : Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability. We hold financial instruments consisting of cash and short-term debt. The fair values of our cash and short-term debt approximate their carrying amounts as reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheet due to the short-term nature of these instruments. We also hold financial instruments consisting of long-term debt, investments and derivatives. The valuation methodologies for these financial instruments are described in Notes , , , and in the Financial Statements. The methods described in these Notes may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values. Furthermore, while we believe our valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of different methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments could result in a different fair value measurement at the reporting date. Foreign Currency Translation We translate assets and liabilities of subsidiaries operating outside of the United States with a functional currency other than the U.S. dollar into U.S. dollars using exchange rates at the end of the respective period. We translate sales, costs and expenses at average exchange rates effective during the respective period. We report foreign currency translation adjustments as a component of other comprehensive income (loss). Currency transaction gains and losses are included in results of operations in the period incurred. Research and Development Expenses We expense research and development (RD) costs as incurred; these costs were $. million in , $. million in and $. million in . We include RD expenses in cost of sales in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Income Taxes We account for uncertain tax positions by determining whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. For tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the consolidated financial statements based on our assertion of the most likely outcome resulting from an examination, including the resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. Earnings Per Share We present basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS)amounts. Basic EPS is calculated by dividing earnings available to common shareowners, which is income excluding the allocation to participating securities, by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the year, excluding unvested restricted stock. Diluted EPS amounts are based upon the weighted average number of common and common-equivalent shares outstanding during the year. We use the treasury stock method to calculate the effect of outstanding share-based compensation awards, which requires us to compute total employee proceeds as the sum ofthe amount the employee must pay upon exercise of the award andthe amount of unearned share-based compensation costs attributed to future services. Share-based compensation awards for which the total employee proceeds of the award exceed the average market price of the same award over the period have an antidilutive effect on EPS, and accordingly, we exclude them from the calculation. Antidilutive share-based compensation awards for the years ended September, ( . million shares), ( . million shares) and ( . million shares) were excluded from the diluted EPS calculation. U.S. GAAP requires unvested share-based payment awards that contain non-forfeitable rights to dividends or dividend equivalents, whether paid or unpaid, to be treated as participating securities and included in the computation of earnings per share pursuant to the two-class method. Our participating securities are composed of unvested restricted stock and non-employee director restricted stock units. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Basis of Presentation and Accounting Policies (Continued) The following table reconciles basic and diluted EPS amounts (in millions, except per share amounts): Net income $ . $ . $ . Less: Allocation to participating securities (. ) (. ) (. ) Net income available to common shareowners $ . $ . $ . Basic weighted average outstanding shares . . . Effect of dilutive securities Stock options . . . Performance shares . . Diluted weighted average outstanding shares . . . Earnings per share: Basic $ . $ . $ . Diluted $ . $ . $ . Share-Based Compensation We recognize share-based compensation expense for equity awards on a straight-line basis over the service period of the award based on the fair value of the award as of the grant date. Product and Workers Compensation Liabilities We record accruals for product and workers compensation claims in the period in which they are probable and reasonably estimable. Our principal self-insurance programs include product liability and workers compensation where we self-insure up to a specified dollar amount. Claims exceeding this amount up to specified limits are covered by insurance policies purchased from commercial insurers. We estimate the liability for the majority of the self-insured claims using our claims experience for the periods being valued. Environmental Matters We record liabilities for environmental matters in the period in which our responsibility is probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated. We make changes to the liabilities in the periods in which the estimated costs of remediation change. At third-party environmental sites where more than one potentially responsible party has been identified, we record a liability for our estimated allocable share of costs related to our involvement with the site, as well as an estimated allocable share of costs related to the involvement of insolvent or unidentified parties. If we determine that recovery from insurers or other third parties is probable and a right of setoff exists, we record the liability net of the estimated recovery. If we determine that recovery from insurers or other third parties is probable but a right of setoff does not exist, we record a liability for the total estimated costs of remediation and a receivable for the estimated recovery. At environmental sites where we are the sole responsible party, we record a liability for the total estimated costs of remediation. Ongoing operating and maintenance expenditures included in our environmental remediation obligations are discounted to present value over the probable future remediation period. Our remaining environmental remediation obligations are undiscounted due to subjectivity of timing and/or amount of future cash payments. Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations We record liabilities for costs related to legal obligations associated with the retirement of a tangible, long-lived asset that results from the acquisition, construction, development or the normal operation of the long-lived asset. The obligation to perform the asset retirement activity is not conditional even though the timing or method may be conditional. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Basis of Presentation and Accounting Policies (Continued) Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements In March , the FASB issueda new standard regarding the presentation of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit costs. This standard requires the service cost component to be reported in the income statement in the same line item as other compensation costs arising from services rendered by the related employees during the period. The other components of net periodic benefit cost are required to be presented separately from the service cost component in either a separate line item or within another appropriate line item with disclosure of where those costs are recorded. This standard also requires that only the service cost component is eligible for capitalization, when applicable. This standard is effective for us for reporting periods starting October , and will be applied retrospectively. The non-service components of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit cost, which are to be reclassified to other income (expense) in the Consolidated Statement of Operations upon adoption of the new standard, are expense of $. million , $. million and $. million for the years ended September, , and , respectively. In February , the FASB issued a new standard on accounting for leases that requires lessees to recognize right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for most leases, among other changes to existing lease accounting guidance. The new standard also requires additional qualitative and quantitative disclosures about leasing activities. This standard is effective for us for reporting periods beginning October , . We are currently evaluating the impact the adoption of this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures. In May , the FASB issued a new standard on revenue recognition related to contracts with customers. This standard supersedes nearly all existing revenue recognition guidance and involves a five-step principles-based approach to recognizing revenue. The underlying principle is to recognize revenue when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected to be received for those goods or services. The new standard will also require additional qualitative and quantitative disclosures about contracts with customers, significant judgments made in applying the revenue-guidance, and assets recognized from the costs to obtain or fulfill a contract. We adopted the new revenue standard, using the modified retrospective transition method, which results in an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings as of October , , our adoption date. The estimated cumulative impact of adopting the new standard is an increase in the opening balance sheet retained earnings of less than $ million . The primary drivers of the impact were changes from the capitalization and deferral of certain contract costs and the timing of revenue, net of costs, for software licenses bundled with services and projects previously accounted for on a completed contract basis. These were partially offset by a deferral of revenue, net of costs, related to the allocation of revenue to hardware and software products and services provided to our customers free of charge as incentives. We do not expect the adoption will have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements, including the presentation of revenues in our Consolidated Statement of Operations. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Changes in the carrying amount of goodwill were (in millions): Architecture Software Control Products Solutions Total Balance as of September, $ . $ . $ ,. Acquisition of businesses . . Divestiture of business (Note ) (. ) (. ) Translation . . . Balance as of September, . . ,. Acquisition of business . . Translation (. ) (. ) (. ) Balance as of September, $ . $ . $ ,. During the year ended September, , we recognized goodwill of $. million and other intangible assets of $. million resulting from one acquisition. In November , we acquired Odos Imaging Limited (Odos), a Scottish technology company that provides three-dimensional, time-of-flight sensing systems for industrial imaging applications. This acquisition enables us to expand our existing capabilities by bringing -D time-of-flight sensor technology to industrial applications. We assigned the full amount of goodwill related to Odos to our Architecture Software segment. Other intangible assets consist of (in millions): September, Carrying Amount Accumulated Amortization Net Amortized intangible assets: Computer software products $ . $ . $ . Customer relationships . . . Technology . . . Trademarks . . . Other . . . Total amortized intangible assets . . . Allen-Bradley trademark not subject to amortization . . Total $ . $ . $ . September, Carrying Amount Accumulated Amortization Net Amortized intangible assets: Computer software products $ . $ . $ . Customer relationships . . . Technology . . . Trademarks . . . Other . . . Total amortized intangible assets . . . Allen-Bradley trademark not subject to amortization . . Total $ . $ . $ . Computer software products represent costs of computer software to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed. Computer software products amortization expense was $. million in , $. million in and $. million in . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets (Continued) Estimated amortization expense is $. million in , $. million in , $. million in , $. million in and $. million in . We performed our annual evaluation of goodwill and indefinite life intangible assets for impairment as required by U.S. GAAP during the second quarter of and concluded that these assets are not impaired. . Inventories Inventories consist of (in millions): September, Finished goods $ . $ . Work in process . . Raw materials . . Inventories $ . $ . . Property, net Property consists of (in millions): September, Land $ . $ . Buildings and improvements . . Machinery and equipment ,. ,. Internal-use software . . Construction in progress . . Total ,. ,. Less accumulated depreciation (,. ) (,. ) Property, net $ . $ . . Long-term and Short-term Debt Long-term debt consists of (in millions): September, .% notes, repaid in December $ $ . .% notes, payable in March . . .% notes, payable in March . . .% debentures, payable in January . . .% debentures, payable in December . . .% debentures, payable in January . . Unamortized discount and other (. ) (. ) Total ,. ,. Less current portion (. ) Long-term debt $ ,. $ ,. In February , upon issuance of our notes payable in March ( Notes) and March ( Notes), we entered into fixed-to-floating interest rate swap contracts with multiple banks that effectively converted the $. million aggregate principal amount to floating rate debt, each at a rate based on three-month LIBOR plus a fixed spread. The effective floating interest rates were . percent for the Notes and . percent for the Notes at September, . The aggregate fair value of the interest rate swap contracts at September, was a net unrealized loss of $. million . We have designated these swaps Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued) . Long-term and Short-term Debt (Continued) as fair value hedges. The individual contracts are recorded in Other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet with corresponding adjustments to the carrying value of the underlying debt. Additional information related to our interest rate swap contracts is included in Note . At September, and , our total borrowing capacity under our unsecured revolving credit facility expiring in March was $. billion . We can increase the aggregate amount of this credit facility by up to $. million , subject to the consent of the banks in the credit facility. We have not borrowed against this credit facility during the years ended September, or . Borrowings under this credit facility bear interest based on short-term money market rates in effect during the period the borrowings are outstanding. In December , we amended the financial covenant under this credit facility. The previous financial covenant, which limited our debt-to-total-capital ratio to percent , was replaced with a minimum EBITDA-to-interest ratio of . to .. The EBITDA-to-interest ratio is defined in the amendment as the ratio of consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the amendment) for the preceding four quarters to consolidated interest expense for the same period. We believe the new covenant provides us greater financial flexibility. Separate short-term unsecured credit facilities of approximately $. million at September, were available to non-U.S. subsidiaries. Borrowings under our non-U.S. credit facilities at September, and were not significant. There are no significant commitment fees or compensating balance requirements under any of our credit facilities. Our short-term debt obligations are primarily comprised of commercial paper borrowings. Commercial paper borrowings outstanding were $. million at September, and $. million at September, . The weighted average interest rate of the commercial paper outstanding was . percent at September, and . percent at September, . Interest payments were $. million during , $. million during and $. million during . Long-term debt is not measured at fair value. The following table presents the carrying amounts and estimated fair values of long-term debt not measured at fair value in the Consolidated Balance Sheet (in millions): September, September, Carrying Value Fair Value Carrying Value Fair Value Current portion of long-term debt $ $ $ . $ . Long-term debt ,. ,. ,. ,. We base the fair value of long-term debt upon quoted market prices for the same or similar issues and therefore consider this a Level fair value measurement. The fair value of long-term debt considers the terms of the debt excluding the impact of derivative and hedging activity. The carrying amount of a portion of our long-term debt is impacted by fixed-to-floating interest rate swap contracts that are designated as fair value hedges. Refer to Note for further information regarding levels in the fair value hierarchy. . Other Current Liabilities Other current liabilities consist of (in millions): September, Unrealized losses on foreign exchange contracts (Note ) $ . $ . Product warranty obligations (Note ) . . Taxes other than income taxes . . Accrued interest . . Income taxes payable . . Other . . Other current liabilities $ . $ . Table of Contents . Product Warranty Obligations We record a liability for product warranty obligations at the time of sale to a customer based upon historical warranty experience. Most of our products are covered under a warranty period that runs for twelve months from either the date of sale or installation. We also record a liability for specific warranty matters when they become known and reasonably estimable. Changes in product warranty obligations were (in millions): September, Beginning balance $ . $ . Warranties recorded at time of sale . . Adjustments to pre-existing warranties (. ) (. ) Settlements of warranty claims (. ) (. ) Ending balance $ . $ . . Investments Our investments consist of (in millions): September, Fixed income securities $ . $ ,. Equity securities ,. Other . . Total investments ,. ,. Less short-term investments (. ) (,. ) Long-term investments $ ,. $ . We record investments in fixed income and equity securities, classified as available-for-sale investments or trading investments, at fair value. Available-for-sale Investments We invest in certificates of deposit, time deposits, commercial paper and other fixed income securities which are classified as available-for-sale. Unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale investments are included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet as a component of accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of any deferred taxes. Realized gains and losses are included in net income. Our available-for-sale investments consist of (in millions): September, Certificates of deposit and time deposits $ . $ ,. Commercial paper . Corporate debt securities . . Government securities . . Asset-backed securities . . Total $ . $ ,. Pre-tax gross unrealized losses on available-for-sale investments were $. million as of September, . Pre-tax gross realized gains and losses on available-for-sale investments were not material for the years ended September, and . At September, , there were no outstanding purchases of available-for-sale investments recorded in accounts payable. We evaluated all available-for-sale investments for which the fair value was less than amortized cost for impairment on an individual security basis at September, . This assessment included consideration of our intent and ability to hold the security and the Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued) . Investments (Continued) credit risks specific to each security. We determined that the declines in fair value of these investments were not other than temporary as of September, , and accordingly we did not recognize any impairment charges in net income. The table below summarizes the contractual maturities of our investments as of September, (in millions). Actual maturities may differ from the contractual maturities below as borrowers may have the right to prepay certain obligations. Fair Value Less than one year $ . Due in one to five years . Total $ . Classification of our available-for-sale investments as current or noncurrent is based on the nature of the investment and when the investment is reasonably expected to be realized. These investments were included in the following line items within the Consolidated Balance Sheet (in millions): September, Short-term investments $ . $ ,. Long-term investments . . Total $ . $ ,. Trading Investments On July , , we purchased ,, shares of PTC common stock (the "PTC Shares") in a private placement at a purchase price of $. per share for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $. billion ("the Purchase"). The PTC Shares are considered equity securities. For a period of approximately years after the Purchase we are subject to entity-specific transfer restrictions subject to certain exceptions. Following the first anniversary of the Purchase, the Company will be allowed to transfer, in the aggregate in any -day period, a number of Shares equal to up to .% of PTC's total outstanding shares of common stock as of the first day in such -day period, but no more than .% of PTC's total outstanding shares of common stock in each of the second year and the third year after the Purchase. The PTC Shares were recorded at fair value and classified as trading securities. At September, , the fair value of the PTC Shares was $,. million , which was recorded in long-term investments in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. For the year ended September, , a gain of $. million related to the PTC Shares was recorded in other income (expense) in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. At September, , the PTC Shares were valued using the most recent closing price of PTC common stock quoted on Nasdaq, resulting in a gain of $. million , less a temporary discount for lack of marketability calculated using a put-option model, resulting in a loss of $. million . The marketability discount is due to an instrument-specific restriction as the PTC Shares were issued to the Company in a private placement and are not currently registered for resale under the Securities Act of , as amended. However, the PTC Shares are contractually required to be registered by PTC under the Securities Act of , as amended, within one year, at which time the discount will be reversed. Fair Value of Investments We recognize all available-for-sale and trading investments at fair value in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The valuation methodologies used for our investments measured at fair value are described below. Certificates of deposit and time deposits These investments are recorded at cost, which approximates fair value. Commercial paper These investments are recorded at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. Corporate debt securities Valued at either the yields currently available on comparable securities of issuers with similar credit ratings or valued under a discounted cash flow approach that maximizes observable inputs, such as current yields of similar instruments, but includes adjustments for certain risks that may not be observable such as credit and liquidity risks. Government securities Valued at the most recent closing price on the active market on which the individual securities are traded or, absent an active market, utilizing observable inputs such as closing prices in less frequently traded markets. Asset-backed securities Valued using a discounted cash flow approach that maximizes observable inputs, such as current yields of benchmark instruments, but includes adjustments for certain risks that may not be observable such as credit and liquidity risks. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - (Continued) . Investments (Continued) Equity securities Valued using the most recent closing price of PTC common stock quoted on Nasdaq, less a temporary discount for lack of marketability. The discount for lack of marketability, which will reverse upon registration of the PTC Shares, is calculated using a put-option model which includes observable and unobservable inputs and is categorized as Level in the fair value hierarchy. The primary inputs include historical and implied PTC common stock volatility and the transfer restriction term. Refer to Note for further information regarding levels in the fair value hierarchy. We did not have any transfers between levels of fair value measurements during the periods presented. Fair values of our investments were (in millions): September, Level Level Level Total Certificates of deposit and time deposits $ $ . $ $ . Corporate debt securities . . Government securities . . . Asset-backed securities . . Equity securities ,. ,. Total $ . $ . $ ,. $ ,. September, Level Level Level Total Certificates of deposit and time deposits $ $ ,. $ $ ,. Commercial paper . . Corporate debt securities . . Government securities . . . Asset-backed securities . . Total $ . $ ,. $ $ ,. The table below sets forth a summary of changes in the fair value of our Level investments (in millions): Equity Securities PTC Share purchase July , $ . Unrealized gain . Balance September , $ ,. Upon purchase of the PTC Shares, we recorded our investment of $. million . The investment consisted of the purchase price of approximately $. billion less a loss of $. million , which includes a $. million valuation adjustment pending registration of the PTC Shares, partially offset by a gain of $. million , resulting from the difference between the purchase price of $. per share and the most recent closing price of PTC common stock quoted on Nasdaq on the Purchase date. The unrealized gain of $. million includes a gain of $. million , resulting from appreciation of the PTC Shares between the Purchase date and the end of the fiscal year, and a $. million decrease in the valuation adjustment associated with a reduction in the expected term of the transfer restriction. The investment of $,. million at September, includes a gain of $. million on investment and a $. million valuation adjustment. . Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward exchange contracts and foreign currency denominated debt obligations to manage certain foreign currency risks. We also use interest rate swap contracts to manage risks associated with interest rate fluctuations. The following information explains how we use and value these types of derivative instruments and how they impact our consolidated financial statements. Additional information related to the impacts of cash flow hedges on other comprehensive income (loss) is included in Note . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Derivative Instruments (Continued) Types of Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities Cash Flow Hedges We enter into foreign currency forward exchange contracts to hedge our exposure to foreign currency exchange rate variability in the expected future cash flows associated with certain third-party and intercompany transactions denominated in foreign currencies forecasted to occur within the next two years (cash flow hedges). We report in other comprehensive income (loss) the effective portion of the gain or loss on derivative financial instruments that we designate and that qualify as cash flow hedges. We reclassify these gains or losses into earnings in the same periods when the hedged transactions affect earnings. To the extent forward exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges are ineffective, changes in value are recorded in earnings through the maturity date. There was no impact on earnings due to ineffective cash flow hedges. At September, , we had a U.S. dollar-equivalent gross notional amount of $. million of foreign currency forward exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges. The pre-tax amount of gains (losses) recorded in other comprehensive income (loss) related to cash flow hedges that would have been recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Operations had they not been so designated was (in millions): Forward exchange contracts $ . $ (. ) $ (. ) The pre-tax amount of gains (losses) reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss into the Consolidated Statement of Operations related to derivative forward exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges, which offset the related gains and losses on the hedged items during the periods presented, was (in millions): Sales $ . $ . $ (. ) Cost of sales (. ) (. ) . Selling, general and administrative expenses . (. ) (. ) Total $ (. ) $ (. ) $ . Approximately $. million of pre-tax net unrealized gains on cash flow hedges as of September, will be reclassified into earnings during the next months. We expect that these net unrealized gains will be offset when the hedged items are recognized in earnings. Net Investment Hedges We use foreign currency forward exchange contracts and foreign currency denominated debt obligations to hedge portions of our net investments in non-U.S. subsidiaries (net investment hedges) against the effect of exchange rate fluctuations on the translation of foreign currency balances to the U.S. dollar. For all instruments that are designated as net investment hedges and meet effectiveness requirements, the net changes in value of the designated hedging instruments are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss within shareowners equity where they offset gains and losses recorded on our net investments globally. To the extent forward exchange contracts or foreign currency denominated debt designated as net investment hedges are ineffective, changes in value are recorded in earnings through the maturity date. There was no impact on earnings due to ineffective net investment hedges. At September, , we had a gross notional amount of $. million of foreign currency forward exchange contracts designated as net investment hedges. The pre-tax amount of gains (losses) recorded in other comprehensive income (loss) related to net investment hedges that would have been recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Operations had they not been so designated was (in millions): Forward exchange contracts $ . $ (. ) $ . Foreign currency denominated debt . Total $ . $ (. ) $ . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Derivative Instruments (Continued) Fair Value Hedges We use interest rate swap contracts to manage the borrowing costs of certain long-term debt. In February , we issued $. million aggregate principal amount of fixed rate notes. Upon issuance of these notes, we entered into fixed-to-floating interest rate swap contracts that effectively convert these notes from fixed rate debt to floating rate debt. We designate these contracts as fair value hedges because they hedge the changes in fair value of the fixed rate notes resulting from changes in interest rates. The changes in value of these fair value hedges are recorded as gains or losses in interest expense and are offset by the losses or gains on the underlying debt instruments, which are also recorded in interest expense. There was no impact on earnings due to ineffective fair value hedges. At September, , the aggregate notional value of our interest rate swaps designated as fair value hedges was $. million . The pre-tax amount of net (losses) gains recognized within the Consolidated Statement of Operations related to derivative instruments designated as fair value hedges, which fully offset the related net gains and losses on the hedged debt instruments during the periods presented, was (in millions): Interest (expense) income $ (. ) $ (. ) $ . Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments Certain of our locations have assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than their functional currencies resulting from intercompany loans and other transactions with third parties denominated in foreign currencies. We enter into foreign currency forward exchange contracts that we do not designate as hedging instruments to offset the transaction gains or losses associated with some of these assets and liabilities. Gains and losses on derivative financial instruments for which we do not elect hedge accounting are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations in each period, based on the change in the fair value of the derivative financial instruments. At September, , we had a U.S. dollar-equivalent gross notional amount of $. million of foreign currency forward exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments. The pre-tax amount of gains (losses) from forward exchange contracts not designated as hedging instruments recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations was (in millions): Cost of sales $ . $ (. ) $ . Other income (expense) (. ) (. ) (. ) Total $ . $ (. ) $ (. ) Fair Value of Derivative Instruments We recognize all derivative financial instruments as either assets or liabilities at fair value in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. We value our forward exchange contracts using a market approach. We use a valuation model based on inputs including forward and spot prices for currency and interest rate curves. We did not change our valuation techniques during fiscal , or . It is our policy to execute such instruments with major financial institutions that we believe to be creditworthy and not to enter into derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes. We diversify our foreign currency forward exchange contracts among counterparties to minimize exposure to any one of these entities. Our foreign currency forward exchange contracts are usually denominated in currencies of major industrial countries. The U.S. dollar-equivalent gross notional amount of our forward exchange contracts totaled $,. million at September, . Currency pairs (buy/sell) comprising the most significant contract notional values were United States dollar (USD)/Euro, USD/Canadian dollar, USD/Singapore dollar, USD/Swiss franc, Euro/British pound and USD/Mexican peso. Refer to Note for further information regarding levels in the fair value hierarchy. We value interest rate swap contracts using a market approach based on observable market inputs including publicized swap curves. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Derivative Instruments (Continued) The fair value of our derivatives and their location in our Consolidated Balance Sheet were (in millions): Fair Value (Level ) Derivatives Designated as Hedging Instruments Balance Sheet Location September, September, Forward exchange contracts Other current assets $ . $ . Forward exchange contracts Other assets . . Forward exchange contracts Other current liabilities (. ) (. ) Forward exchange contracts Other liabilities (. ) (. ) Interest rate swap contracts Other liabilities (. ) (. ) Total $ (. ) $ (. ) Fair Value (Level ) Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments Balance Sheet Location September, September, Forward exchange contracts Other current assets $ . $ . Forward exchange contracts Other assets . Forward exchange contracts Other current liabilities (. ) (. ) Total $ . $ (. ) Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Shareowners Equity Common Stock At September, , the authorized stock of the Company consisted of one billion shares of common stock, par value $. per share, and million shares of preferred stock, without par value. At September, , . million shares of authorized common stock were reserved for various incentive plans. Changes in outstanding common shares are summarized as follows (in millions): Beginning balance . . . Treasury stock purchases (. ) (. ) (. ) Shares delivered under incentive plans . . . Ending balance . . . At September, , there were $. million of outstanding common stock share repurchases recorded in accounts payable. At September, , there were no outstanding common stock share repurchases recorded in accounts payable. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss by component for the years ended September, , and were (in millions): Pension and other postretirement benefit plan adjustments, net of tax (Note ) Accumulated currency translation adjustments, net of tax Net unrealized gains (losses) on cash flow hedges, net of tax Net unrealized gains (losses) on available-for-sale investments, net of tax Total accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax Balance as of September, $ (,. ) $ (. ) $ . $ $ (,. ) Other comprehensive loss before reclassifications (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss . (. ) . Other comprehensive loss (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Balance as of September, $ (,. ) $ (. ) $ (. ) $ $ (,. ) Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications . . (. ) (. ) . Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss . . . Other comprehensive income (loss) . . (. ) (. ) . Balance as of September, $ (. ) $ (. ) $ (. ) $ (. ) $ (,. ) Other comprehensive income (loss) before reclassifications . (. ) . (. ) . Amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss . . . Other comprehensive income (loss) . (. ) . (. ) . Balance as of September, $ (. ) $ (. ) $ . $ (. ) $ (. ) Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Shareowners Equity (Continued) The reclassifications out of accumulated other comprehensive loss to the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the years ended September, , and were (in millions): Year Ended September , Affected Line in the Consolidated Statement of Operations Pension and other postretirement benefit plan adjustments: Amortization of prior service credit $ (. ) $ (. ) $ (. ) (a) Amortization of net actuarial loss . . . (a) Settlements . . (a) . . . Income before income taxes (. ) (. ) (. ) Income tax provision $ . $ . $ . Net income Net unrealized (gains) losses on cash flow hedges: Forward exchange contracts $ (. ) $ (. ) $ . Sales Forward exchange contracts . . (. ) Cost of sales Forward exchange contracts (. ) . . Selling, general and administrative expenses . . (. ) Income before income taxes (. ) (. ) . Income tax provision $ . $ . $ (. ) Net income Total reclassifications $ . $ . $ . Net income (a) Reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss into cost of sales and selling, general and administrative expenses. These components are included in the computation of net periodic benefit costs. See Note for further information. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) .Share-Based Compensation During , and , we recognized $. million , $. million and $. million of pre-tax share-based compensation expense, respectively. The total income tax benefit related to share-based compensation expense was $. million , $. million and $. million during , and , respectively. We recognize compensation expense on grants of share-based compensation awards on a straight-line basis over the service period of each award recipient. As of September, , total unrecognized compensation cost related to share-based compensation awards was $. million , net of estimated forfeitures, which we expect to recognize over a weighted average period of approximately . years . Our Long-Term Incentives Plan, as amended ( Plan), authorizes us to deliver up to . million shares of our common stock upon exercise of stock options, upon grant, or in payment of stock appreciation rights, performance shares, performance units, restricted stock units or restricted stock. Our Directors Stock Plan, as amended, authorizes us to deliver up to . million shares of our common stock upon exercise of stock options, upon grant, or in payment of restricted stock units. Shares relating to awards under our Plan, or Long-Term Incentives Plan, as amended, that terminate by expiration, forfeiture, cancellation or otherwise without the issuance or delivery of shares will be available for further awards under the Plan. Approximately . million shares under our Plan and . million shares under our Directors Stock Plan remain available for future grant or payment at September, . We use treasury stock to deliver shares of our common stock under these plans. Our Plan does not permit share-based compensation awards to be granted after February, . Stock Options We have granted non-qualified and incentive stock options to purchase our common stock under various incentive plans at prices equal to the fair market value of the stock on the grant dates. The exercise price for stock options granted under the plans may be paid in cash, already-owned shares of common stock or a combination of cash and such shares. Stock options expire ten years after the grant date and vest ratably over three years . The per-share weighted average fair value of stock options granted during the years ended September, , and was $. , $. and $. , respectively. The total intrinsic value of stock options exercised was $. million , $. million and $. million during , and , respectively. We estimated the fair value of each stock option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes pricing model and the following assumptions: Average risk-free interest rate . % . % . % Expected dividend yield . % . % . % Expected volatility % % % Expected term (years) . . . The average risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury security rates corresponding to the expected term in effect as of the grant date. The expected dividend yield is based on the expected annual dividend as a percentage of the market value of our common stock as of the grant date. We determined expected volatility using daily historical volatility of our stock price over the most recent period corresponding to the expected term as of the grant date. We determined the expected term of the stock options using historical data adjusted for the estimated exercise dates of unexercised options. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) .Share-Based Compensation (Continued) A summary of stock option activity for the year ended September, is: Shares (in thousands) Wtd. Avg. Exercise Price Wtd. Avg. Remaining Contractual Term (years) Aggregate Intrinsic Value of In-The-Money Options (in millions) Outstanding at October, , $ . Granted . Exercised ( ) . Forfeited ( ) . Canceled ( ) . Outstanding at September, , . . $ . Vested or expected to vest at September, , . . . Exercisable at September, , . . . Performance Share Awards Certain officers and key employees are also eligible to receive shares of our common stock in payment of performance share awards granted to them. Grantees of performance shares will be eligible to receive shares of our common stock depending upon our total shareowner return, assuming reinvestment of all dividends, relative to the performance of companies in the SP Index over a three -year period. The awards actually earned will range from zero percent to percent of the targeted number of performance shares for the three-year performance periods and will be paid, to the extent earned, in the fiscal quarter following the end of the applicable three-year performance period. A summary of performance share activity for the year ended September, is as follows: Performance Shares (in thousands) Wtd. Avg. Grant Date Share Fair Value Outstanding at October, $ . Granted () . Adjustment for performance results achieved () . Vested and issued ( ) . Forfeited ( ) . Outstanding at September, . () Performance shares granted assuming achievement of performance goals at target. () Adjustments were due to the number of shares vested under the fiscal awards at the end of the three-year performance period ended September, being higher than the target number of shares. The following table summarizes information about performance shares vested during the years ended September , , and : Percent payout % % % Shares vested (in thousands) Total fair value of shares vested (in millions) $ . $ . $ . For the three-year performance period ending September, , the payout will be percent of the target number of shares, with a maximum of , shares to be delivered in payment under the awards in December . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) .Share-Based Compensation (Continued) The per-share fair value of performance share awards granted during the years ended September, , and was $. , $. and $. , respectively, which we determined using a Monte Carlo simulation and the following assumptions: Average risk-free interest rate . % . % . % Expected dividend yield . % . % . % Expected volatility % % % The average risk-free interest rate is based on the three-year U.S. Treasury security rate in effect as of the grant date. The expected dividend yield is based on the expected annual dividend as a percentage of the market value of our common stock as of the grant date. The expected volatilities were determined using daily historical volatility for the most recent three-year period as of the grant date. Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units We grant restricted stock and restricted stock units to certain employees, and non-employee directors may elect to receive a portion of their compensation in restricted stock units. Restrictions on employee restricted stock and employee restricted stock units generally lapse over periods ranging from one to five years . Director restricted stock units generally are payable upon retirement. We value restricted stock and restricted stock units at the closing market value of our common stock on the date of grant. The weighted average grant date fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards granted during the years ended September, , and was $. , $. and $. , respectively. The total fair value of shares vested during the years ended September, , , and was $. million , $. million , and $. million , respectively. A summary of restricted stock and restricted stock unit activity for the year ended September, is as follows: Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units (in thousands) Wtd. Avg. Grant Date Share Fair Value Outstanding at October, $ . Granted . Vested ( ) . Forfeited ( ) . Outstanding at September, $ . We also granted approximately , shares of unrestricted common stock to non-employee directors during the year ended September, . The weighted average grant date fair value of the unrestricted stock awards granted during the years ended September, , , and was $. , $. and $. , respectively. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Retirement Benefits We sponsor funded and unfunded pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans for our employees. The pension plans provide for monthly pension payments to eligible employees after retirement. Pension benefits for salaried employees generally are based on years of credited service and average earnings. Pension benefits for hourly employees are primarily based on specified benefit amounts and years of service. Effective July, , we closed participation in our U.S. and Canada pension plans to employees hired after June, . Employees hired after June, are instead eligible to participate in defined contribution plans. Effective October, , we also closed participation in our U.K. pension plan to employees hired after September, and these employees are now eligible for a defined contribution plan. Benefits to be provided to plan participants hired before July, or October, , respectively, are not affected by these changes. Our policy with respect to funding our pension obligations is to fund at a minimum the amount required by applicable laws and governmental regulations. We were not required to make contributions to satisfy minimum funding requirements in our U.S. pension plans in , or . We did not make voluntary contributions to our U.S. qualified pension plan in . We made a voluntary contribution of $. million to our U.S. qualified pension plan in . We did not make voluntary contributions to our U.S. qualified pension plan in . We sponsor various defined contribution savings plans that allow eligible employees to contribute a portion of their income in accordance with plan specific guidelines. We contribute to savings plans and/or will match a percentage of the employee contributions up to certain limits. The Company contributions to defined contribution plans are based on age and years of service and range from % to % of eligible compensation. Expense related to these plans was $. million in , $. million in and $. million in . Other postretirement benefits are primarily in the form of retirement medical plans that cover most of our employees in the U.S. and Canada and provide for the payment of certain medical costs of eligible employees and dependents after retirement. Net Periodic Benefit Cost The components of net periodic benefit cost (income) are (in millions): Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits Service cost $ . $ . $ . $ . $ . $ . Interest cost . . . . . . Expected return on plan assets (. ) (. ) (. ) Amortization: Prior service cost (credit) . (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Net actuarial loss . . . . . . Special termination benefit . . Settlements . . Net periodic benefit cost (income) $ . $ . $ . $ (. ) $ . $ (. ) Significant assumptions used in determining net periodic benefit cost (income) are (in weighted averages): Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits U.S. Plans Discount rate . % . % . % . % . % . % Expected return on plan assets . % . % . % Compensation increase rate . % . % . % Non-U.S. Plans Discount rate . % . % . % . % . % . % Expected return on plan assets . % . % . % Compensation increase rate . % . % . % Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Retirement Benefits (Continued) Net Benefit Obligation Benefit obligation, plan assets, funded status and net liability information is summarized as follows (in millions): Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits Benefit obligation at beginning of year $ ,. $ ,. $ . $ . Service cost . . . . Interest cost . . . . Actuarial gains (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Plan amendments (. ) (. ) Plan participant contributions . . . . Benefits paid (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Special termination benefit . Settlements (. ) (. ) Curtailments (. ) (. ) Currency translation and other (. ) . (. ) . Benefit obligation at end of year ,. ,. . . Plan assets at beginning of year ,. ,. Actual return on plan assets . . Company contributions . . . . Plan participant contributions . . . . Benefits paid (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Settlements (. ) (. ) Currency translation and other (. ) . Plan assets at end of year ,. ,. Funded status of plans $ (. ) $ (. ) $ (. ) $ (. ) Net amount on balance sheet consists of: Other assets $ . $ . $ $ Compensation and benefits (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Retirement benefits (. ) (. ) (. ) (. ) Net amount on balance sheet $ (. ) $ (. ) $ (. ) $ (. ) The actuarial gains recorded in were primarily the result of an increase in the discount rate for U.S. Plans, which increased from .% in to .% in . The actuarial gains recorded in were primarily the result of an increase in the discount rate for U.S. Plans, which increased from .% in to .% in . Amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax, at September, and which have not yet been recognized in net periodic benefit cost are as follows (in millions): Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits Prior service cost (credit) $ . $ . $ (. ) $ (. ) Net actuarial loss . . . . Total $ . $ . $ (. ) $ (. ) During , we recognized prior service credits of $. million ( $. million net of tax) and net actuarial losses of $. million ( $. million net of tax) in pension and other postretirement net periodic benefit cost, which were included in accumulated other comprehensive loss at September, . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Retirement Benefits (Continued) The accumulated benefit obligation for our pension plans was $,. million and $,. million at September, and , respectively. Information regarding our pension plans with projected benefit obligations in excess of the fair value of plan assets (underfunded plans) at September, and are as follows (in millions): Projected benefit obligation $ ,. $ ,. Fair value of plan assets ,. ,. Information regarding our pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations in excess of the fair value of plan assets (underfunded plans) at September, and are as follows (in millions): Accumulated benefit obligation $ . $ ,. Fair value of plan assets . ,. Significant assumptions used in determining the benefit obligations are (in weighted averages): Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits U.S. Plans Discount rate . % . % . % . % Compensation increase rate . % . % Health care cost trend rate () . % . % Non-U.S. Plans Discount rate . % . % . % . % Compensation increase rate . % . % Health care cost trend rate () . % . % () The health care cost trend rate reflects the estimated increase in gross medical claims costs. As a result of the plan amendment adopted effective October, , our effective per person retiree medical cost increase is zero percent beginning in for the majority of our postretirement benefit plans. For our other plans, we assume the gross health care cost trend rate will decrease to .% in for U.S. Plans and will not change in for Non-U.S. Plans. Estimated Future Payments We expect to contribute $. million related to our global pension plans and $. million to our postretirement benefit plans in . The following benefit payments, which include employees expected future service, as applicable, are expected to be paid (in millions): Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits $ . $ . . . . . . . . . ,. . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Retirement Benefits (Continued) Plan Assets In determining the expected long-term rate of return on assets assumption, we consider actual returns on plan assets over the long term, adjusted for forward-looking considerations, such as inflation, interest rates, equity performance and the active management of the plans invested assets. We also considered our current and expected mix of plan assets in setting this assumption. This resulted in the selection of the weighted average long-term rate of return on assets assumption. Our global weighted-average targeted and actual asset allocations at September, by asset category, are: Allocation Target September , Asset Category Range Allocations Equity securities % % % % % Debt securities % % % % % Other % % % % % The investment objective for pension funds related to our defined benefit plans is to meet the plans benefit obligations, while maximizing the long-term growth of assets without undue risk. We strive to achieve this objective by investing plan assets within target allocation ranges and diversification within asset categories. Target allocation ranges are guidelines that are adjusted periodically based on ongoing monitoring by plan fiduciaries. Investment risk is controlled by rebalancing to target allocations on a periodic basis and ongoing monitoring of investment manager performance relative to the investment guidelines established for each manager. As of September, and , our pension plans do not directly own our common stock. In certain countries where we operate, there are no legal requirements or financial incentives provided to companies to pre-fund pension obligations. In these instances, we typically make benefit payments directly from cash as they become due, rather than by creating a separate pension fund. The valuation methodologies used for our pension plans investments measured at fair value are described as follows. There have been no changes in the methodologies used at September, and . Common stock Valued at the closing price reported on the active market on which the individual securities are traded. Mutual funds Valued at the net asset value (NAV) reported by the fund. Corporate debt Valued at either the yields currently available on comparable securities of issuers with similar credit ratings or valued under a discounted cash flow approach that maximizes observable inputs, such as current yields of similar instruments, but includes adjustments for certain risks that may not be observable such as credit and liquidity risks. Government securities Valued at the most recent closing price on the active market on which the individual securities are traded or, absent an active market, utilizing observable inputs such as closing prices in less frequently traded markets. Common collective trusts Valued at the NAV as determined by the custodian of the fund. The NAV is based on the fair value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus its liabilities then divided by the number of units outstanding. Private equity and alternative equity Valued at the estimated fair value, as determined by the respective fund manager, based on the NAV of the investment units held at year end, which is subject to judgment. Real estate funds Consists of the real estate funds, which provide an indirect investment into a diversified and multi-sector portfolio of property assets. Publicly-traded real estate funds are valued at the most recent closing price reported on the SIX Swiss Exchange. The remainder is valued at the estimated fair value, as determined by the respective fund manager, based on the NAV of the investment units held at year end, which is subject to judgment. Insurance contracts Valued at the aggregate amount of accumulated contribution and investment income less amounts used to make benefit payments and administrative expenses which approximates fair value. Other Consists of other fixed income investments and common collective trusts with a mix of equity and fixed income underlying assets. Other fixed income investments are valued at the most recent closing price reported in the markets in which the individual securities are traded, which may be infrequently. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Retirement Benefits (Continued) Refer to Note for further information regarding levels in the fair value hierarchy. In accordance with ASC Subtopic -, certain investments that are measured at fair value using the NAV (or its equivalent) practical expedient have not been classified in the fair value hierarchy. The fair value amounts presented in this table are intended to permit reconciliation of the fair value hierarchy to the line items presented in the consolidated financial statements. The guidance under this subtopic was effective for us beginning in fiscal . The following table presents our pension plans investments measured at fair value as of September, : Level Level Level Total U.S. Plans Cash and cash equivalents $ . $ $ $ . Equity securities: Mutual funds . . Common stock . . Common collective trusts . . Fixed income securities: Corporate debt . . Government securities . . . Common collective trusts . . Other types of investments: Insurance contracts . . Total U.S. Plans investments in fair value hierarchy $ ,. $ ,. $ . ,. U.S. Plans investments measured at NAV: Private equity . Alternative equity . Total U.S. Plans investments ,. Non-U.S. Plans Cash and cash equivalents $ . $ $ . Equity securities: Common stock . . Common collective trusts . . Fixed income securities: Corporate debt . . Government securities . . . Common collective trusts . . Other types of investments: Real estate funds . . Insurance contracts . . Other . . Total Non-U.S. Plans investments in fair value hierarchy $ . $ . $ . . Non-U.S. Plans investments measured at NAV: Real estate funds . Total Non-U.S. Plans investments . Total investments measured at fair value $ ,. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Retirement Benefits (Continued) The following table presents our pension plans investments measured at fair value as of September, : Level Level Level Total U.S. Plans Cash and cash equivalents $ . $ $ $ . Equity securities: Mutual funds . . Common stock . . Common collective trusts . . Fixed income securities: Corporate debt . . Government securities . . . Common collective trusts . . Other types of investments: Insurance contracts . . Total U.S. Plans investments in fair value hierarchy $ ,. $ ,. $ . ,. U.S. Plans investments measured at NAV: Private equity . Alternative equity . Total U.S. Plans investments ,. Non-U.S. Plans Cash and cash equivalents $ . $ $ . Equity securities: Common stock . . Common collective trusts . . Fixed income securities: Corporate debt . . Government securities . . . Common collective trusts . . Other types of investments: Real estate funds . . Insurance contracts . . Other . . Total Non-U.S. Plans investments in fair value hierarchy $ . $ . $ . . Non-U.S. Plans investments measured at NAV: Real estate funds . Total Non-U.S. Plans investments . Total investments measured at fair value $ ,. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Retirement Benefits (Continued) The table below sets forth a summary of changes in fair market value of our pension plans Level assets for the year ended September, : Balance October, Realized Gains (Losses) Unrealized Gains (Losses) Purchases, Sales, Issuances, and Settlements, Net Balance September , U.S. Plans Insurance contracts $ . $ $ $ $ . Non-U.S. Plans Insurance contracts . (. ) . . Other . (. ) . $ . $ $ (. ) $ . $ . The table below sets forth a summary of changes in fair market value of our pension plans Level assets for the year ended September, : Balance October, Realized Gains (Losses) Unrealized Gains (Losses) Purchases, Sales, Issuances, and Settlements, Net Balance September , U.S. Plans Insurance contracts $ . $ $ $ $ . Non-U.S. Plans Insurance contracts . (. ) . . Other . . $ . $ $ (. ) $ . $ . In August , the FASB issued a new standard which adds, removes and modifies various disclosures for defined benefit and other postretirement benefit plans. This standard is effective for us for reporting periods beginning October , ; however, we elected to adopt this standard early as of September, and applied the changes retrospectively to all periods presented herein. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our disclosures. .Other Income (Expense) The components of other income (expense) are (in millions): Gain on sale of business $ $ . $ Change in fair value of investments . Interest income . . . Royalty income . . . Legacy product liability and environmental benefit (charges) . (. ) (. ) Other . (. ) . Other income (expense) $ . $ . $ . In September , we sold W Interconnections, Inc. and subsidiaries, which was included within our Control Products Solutions segment, for approximately $. million . We recorded a pre-tax gain of $. million as a result of this divestiture, which is included within Other income (expense) in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The change in fair value of investments includes the gain on investments and valuation adjustment pending registration of PTC Shares. Additional information related to our investments is included in Note . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Income Taxes Selected income tax data (in millions): Components of income before income taxes: United States $ . $ . $ . Non-United States . . . Total $ ,. $ ,. $ . Components of the income tax provision: Current: United States $ . $ . $ . Non-United States . . . State and local . . . Total current . . . Deferred: United States . . (. ) Non-United States . (. ) (. ) State and local . . (. ) Total deferred . . (. ) Income tax provision $ . $ . $ . Total income taxes paid $ . $ . $ . Provisional Amounts On December , , the Tax Act was enacted. The Tax Act significantly changes U.S. tax law by, among other things, lowering the statutory corporate income tax rate, implementing a modified territorial tax system, and imposing a one-time transition tax on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries that were previously deferred from U.S. tax ("transition tax"). As a fiscal year taxpayer, certain provisions of the Tax Act impact us in fiscal year , including the change in the federal statutory rate and the one-time transition tax, while other provisions will be effective in fiscal year , including the tax on global intangible low-tax income ("GILTI") of foreign subsidiaries, the deduction for foreign derived intangible income ("FDII"), and the elimination of the domestic manufacturing deduction. Our base rate reflects a change in the U.S. federal statutory rate from percent to percent resulting from the enactment of the Tax Act. The rate change was effective for us at the beginning of our fiscal year, using a blended rate for the annual period. As a result, the blended statutory rate for our fiscal year is . percent. In December , the SEC issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. ("SAB "), which provides guidance on how a company may recognize provisional estimates related to the effects of the Tax Act. The final impact of the Tax Act may differ from provisional estimates as a result of additional analysis of provisions of the Tax Act, and interpretation of any additional guidance issued by standard-setting and regulatory bodies such as the U.S. Treasury Department and FASB. The Company will complete its accounting related to the Tax Act within the one-year measurement period allowed under SAB . As a result of the Tax Act, we revalued our U.S. deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the rate at which they are expected to reverse in the future, which is either . percent for reversals in or percent for reversals in and subsequent years. We have recorded a provisional amount of $. million in the year ended September , . The Tax Act requires the transition tax to be computed based on our total post- earnings and profits (EP) at December , , that were previously deferred from U.S. income tax. As a result, we are required to make reasonable estimates given our September fiscal year. We have recorded a provisional expense of $. million for the transition tax liability for all of our foreign subsidiaries in . The transition tax is applied to the balance of post- EP at rates of . percent of cash assets (as defined in the Tax Act) and percent for non-cash assets measured at the higher of the balance at September , , or the Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Income Taxes (Continued) average of the ending balances at September , and September , . Our estimates will change as a result of adjustments impacting EP, and distributions and other transactions impacting cash. Under the Tax Act, the Company will elect to pay the transition tax interest-free over eight years, with % due in each of the first five years, % in year six, % in year seven, and % in year eight. We have recorded income taxes payable of $. million in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, of which $. million is recorded within other current liabilities and $. million is recorded within other liabilities because that portion is payable greater than twelve months after September , . The Tax Act includes a provision to tax GILTI of foreign subsidiaries. The FASB allows companies to adopt an accounting policy to either recognize deferred taxes for GILTI or treat it as a tax cost in the year incurred. Due to the complexity of the new GILTI tax rules, the Company is continuing to evaluate this provision of the Tax Act and the application of U.S. GAAP. The GILTI provisions will be effective for us beginning October , . The Company has historically accounted for the earnings of its foreign subsidiaries as being indefinitely reinvested under ASC -. As a result of the broad changes to the U.S. international tax system under the Tax Act, the Company will begin to account for substantially all of its non-U.S. subsidiaries as being immediately subject to tax, while still concluding that earnings are indefinitely reinvested for a limited number of subsidiaries. For non-U.S. subsidiaries that are accounted for as being immediately subject to tax, we have recorded deferred tax liabilities of $. million related to foreign withholding taxes on future distributions of historic earnings and deferred tax assets of $. million related to U.S. foreign tax credits attributable to the foreign withholding taxes. The company continues to treat as permanently invested the earnings of a limited number of its subsidiaries due mainly to local country repatriation restrictions. We have not provided for deferred taxes on the undistributed earnings of these subsidiaries as they are not material. Effective Tax Rate Reconciliation The reconciliation between the U.S. federal statutory rate and our effective tax rate was: Statutory tax rate . % . % . % State and local income taxes . . . Non-United States taxes (. ) (. ) (. ) Tax effect of foreign dividends . . . Impact of the Tax Act . Foreign currency transaction loss (. ) (. ) Share-based compensation (. ) (. ) Research and development tax credit (. ) (. ) (. ) Other . (. ) (. ) Effective income tax rate . % . % . % We operate in certain non-U.S. tax jurisdictions under government-sponsored tax incentive programs, which may be extended if certain additional requirements are met. The program which generates the primary benefit will expire in . The tax benefit attributable to these programs was $. million ( $. per diluted share) in , $. million ( $. per diluted share) in and $. million ( $. per diluted share) in . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Income Taxes (Continued) Deferred Taxes The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to our net deferred income tax assets (liabilities) were (in millions): Deferred income tax assets: Compensation and benefits $ . $ . Inventory . . Returns, rebates and incentives . . Retirement benefits . . Environmental remediation and other site-related costs . . Share-based compensation . . Other accruals and reserves . . Net operating loss carryforwards . . Tax credit carryforwards . . Capital loss carryforwards . . Other . . Subtotal . . Valuation allowance (. ) (. ) Net deferred income tax assets . . Deferred income tax liabilities: Property (. ) (. ) Intangible assets (. ) (. ) Investments (. ) Unremitted earnings of foreign subsidiaries (. ) Other (. ) (. ) Deferred income tax liabilities (. ) (. ) Total net deferred income tax assets $ . $ . We believe it is more likely than not that we will realize our deferred tax assets through the reduction of future taxable income, other than for the deferred tax assets reflected below. Tax attributes and related valuation allowances at September, were (in millions): Tax attributes and related valuation allowances Tax Benefit Amount Valuation Allowance Carryforward Period Ends Non-United States net operating loss carryforward $ . $ . - Non-United States net operating loss carryforward . . Indefinite Non-United States capital loss carryforward . . Indefinite United States net operating loss carryforward . - United States tax credit carryforward . - State and local net operating loss carryforward . . - State tax credit carryforward . . - Subtotal . . Other deferred tax assets . . Indefinite Total $ . $ . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Income Taxes (Continued) Unrecognized Tax Benefits A reconciliation of our gross unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties, is as follows (in millions): Gross unrecognized tax benefits balance at beginning of year $ . $ . $ . Additions based on tax positions related to the current year . . Additions based on tax positions related to prior years . . . Reductions based on tax positions related to prior years (. ) (. ) Reductions related to settlements with taxing authorities (. ) (. ) (. ) Reductions related to lapses of statute of limitations (. ) (. ) (. ) Effect of foreign currency translation . Gross unrecognized tax benefits balance at end of year $ . $ . $ . The amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits that would reduce our effective tax rate if recognized was $. million , $. million and $. million at September, , and , respectively. Accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits were $. million and $. million at September, and , respectively. We recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in the income tax provision. Benefits (expense) recognized were $. million , $. million and $(.) million in , and , respectively. We believe it is reasonably possible that the amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits could be reduced by up to $. million in the next months as a result of the resolution of tax matters in various global jurisdictions and the lapses of statutes of limitations. If all of the unrecognized tax benefits were recognized, the net reduction to our income tax provision, including the recognition of interest and penalties and offsetting tax assets, could be up to $. million . We conduct business globally and are routinely audited by the various tax jurisdictions in which we operate. We are no longer subject to U.S. federal income tax examinations for years before and are no longer subject to state, local and non-U.S. income tax examinations for years before . . Commitments and Contingent Liabilities Obligations and expected recoveries related to environmental remediation costs, conditional asset retirement obligations and other recorded indemnification matters are as follows: Environmental remediation costs $ . $ . Conditional asset retirement obligations . . Indemnification liabilities . . Total recorded liabilities . . Recorded probable expected recoveries (. ) (. ) Net recorded liabilities $ . $ . As of September, , we have estimated the total reasonably possible costs we could incur from these environmental remediation and indemnification liabilities to be $. million ( $. million , net of related receivables). Environmental Matters Federal, state and local requirements relating to the discharge of substances into the environment, the disposal of hazardous wastes and other activities affecting the environment have and will continue to have an effect on our manufacturing operations. Thus far, compliance with environmental requirements and resolution of environmental claims have been accomplished without material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Commitments and Contingent Liabilities (Continued) We have been designated as a potentially responsible party at Superfund sites, excluding sites as to which our records disclose no involvement or as to which our potential liability has been finally determined and assumed by third parties. In addition, various other lawsuits, claims and proceedings have been asserted against us seeking remediation of alleged environmental impairments, principally at previously owned properties. Environmental remediation cost liabilities and related expected recoveries are as follows (in millions): Other current liabilities $ . Other liabilities . Total recorded environmental remediation costs () . Receivables (. ) Other assets (. ) Total recorded probable expected recoveries (. ) Net environmental remediation costs $ . () Includes $. million related to discounted ongoing operating and maintenance expenditures. Based on our assessment, we believe that our expenditures for environmental capital investment and remediation necessary to comply with present regulations governing environmental protection and other expenditures for the resolution of environmental claims will not have a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We cannot assess the possible effect of compliance with future requirements. Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations We accrue for costs related to a legal obligation associated with the retirement of a tangible long-lived asset that results from the acquisition, construction, development or the normal operation of the long-lived asset. The obligation to perform the asset retirement activity is not conditional even though the timing or method may be conditional. Identified conditional asset retirement obligations include asbestos abatement and remediation of soil contamination beneath current and previously divested facilities. We estimate conditional asset retirement obligations using site-specific knowledge and historical industry expertise. Conditional asset retirement obligations and related expected recoveries are as follows (in millions): Other current liabilities $ . $ . Other liabilities . . Total recorded conditional asset retirement obligations . . Receivables (. ) Other assets (. ) (. ) Total recorded probable expected recoveries (. ) (. ) Net conditional asset retirement obligations $ . $ . There have been no significant changes in liabilities incurred, liabilities settled, accretion expense or revisions in estimated cash flows for the periods ended September, and , respectively. Other Matters Various other lawsuits, claims and proceedings have been or may be instituted or asserted against us relating to the conduct of our business, including those pertaining to product liability, environmental, safety and health, intellectual property, employment and contract matters. Although the outcome of litigation cannot be predicted with certainty and some lawsuits, claims or proceedings may be disposed of unfavorably to us, we believe the disposition of matters that are pending or have been asserted will not have a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Commitments and Contingent Liabilities (Continued) We (including our subsidiaries) have been named as a defendant in lawsuits alleging personal injury as a result of exposure to asbestos that was used in certain components of our products many years ago. Currently there are a few thousand claimants in lawsuits that name us as defendants, together with hundreds of other companies. In some cases, the claims involve products from divested businesses, and we are indemnified for most of the costs. However, we have agreed to defend and indemnify asbestos claims associated with products manufactured or sold by our former Dodge mechanical and Reliance Electric motors and motor repair services businesses prior to their divestiture by us, which occurred on January, . We are also responsible for half of the costs and liabilities associated with asbestos cases against our former Rockwell International Corporation's divested measurement and flow control business. But in all cases, for those claimants who do show that they worked with our products or products of divested businesses for which we are responsible, we nevertheless believe we have meritorious defenses, in substantial part due to the integrity of the products, the encapsulated nature of any asbestos-containing components, and the lack of any impairing medical condition on the part of many claimants. We defend those cases vigorously. Historically, we have been dismissed from the vast majority of these claims with no payment to claimants. We have maintained insurance coverage that we believe covers indemnity and defense costs, over and above self-insured retentions, for claims arising from our former Allen-Bradley subsidiary. Following litigation against Nationwide Indemnity Company (Nationwide) and Kemper Insurance (Kemper), the insurance carriers that provided liability insurance coverage to Allen-Bradley, we entered into separate agreements on April , with both insurance carriers to further resolve responsibility for ongoing and future coverage of Allen-Bradley asbestos claims. In exchange for a lump sum payment, Kemper bought out its remaining liability and has been released from further insurance obligations to Allen-Bradley. Nationwide entered into a cost share agreement with us to pay the substantial majority of future defense and indemnity costs for Allen-Bradley asbestos claims. We believe that this arrangement with Nationwide will continue to provide coverage for Allen-Bradley asbestos claims throughout the remaining life of the asbestos liability. We also have rights to historic insurance policies that provide indemnity and defense costs, over and above self-insured retentions, for claims arising out of certain asbestos liabilities relating to the divested measurement and flow control business. Following litigation against several insurers to pursue coverage for these claims, we entered into separate agreements with the insurers that resulted in both lump sum payments and coverage-in-place agreements. We believe these arrangements will provide substantial coverage for future defense and indemnity costs for these asbestos claims throughout the remaining life of asbestos liability. The uncertainties of asbestos claim litigation make it difficult to predict accurately the ultimate outcome of asbestos claims. That uncertainty is increased by the possibility of adverse rulings or new legislation affecting asbestos claim litigation or the settlement process. Subject to these uncertainties and based on our experience defending asbestos claims, we do not believe these lawsuits will have a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We have, from time to time, divested certain of our businesses. In connection with these divestitures, certain lawsuits, claims and proceedings may be instituted or asserted against us related to the period that we owned the businesses, either because we agreed to retain certain liabilities related to these periods or because such liabilities fall upon us by operation of law. In some instances the divested business has assumed the liabilities; however, it is possible that we might be responsible to satisfy those liabilities if the divested business is unable to do so. In connection with the spin-offs of our former automotive business, semiconductor systems business and Rockwell Collins avionics and communications business, the spun-off companies have agreed to indemnify us for substantially all contingent liabilities related to the respective businesses, including environmental and intellectual property matters. In conjunction with the sale of our Dodge mechanical and Reliance Electric motors and motor repair services businesses, we agreed to indemnify Baldor Electric Company for costs and damages related to certain legal, legacy environmental and asbestos matters of these businesses arising before January, , for which the maximum exposure would be capped at the amount received for the sale. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Commitments and Contingent Liabilities (Continued) Indemnification liabilities and related expected recoveries are as follows (in millions): Other current liabilities $ . $ . Other liabilities . . Total recorded indemnification liabilities . . Receivables (. ) (. ) Other assets (. ) (. ) Total recorded probable expected recoveries (. ) (. ) Net indemnification liabilities $ . $ . Included in the above are certain environmental indemnification liabilities that are substantially indemnified by ExxonMobil Corporation for which we have recorded a liability of $. million and $. million , and a related receivable of $. million and $. million , as of September, and , respectively. In many countries we provide a limited intellectual property indemnity as part of our terms and conditions of sale. We also at times provide limited intellectual property indemnities in other contracts with third parties, such as contracts concerning the development and manufacture of our hardware and software products. As of September, , we were not aware of any material indemnification claims that were probable or reasonably possible of an unfavorable outcome. Historically, claims that have been made under the indemnification agreements have not had a material impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations; however, to the extent that valid indemnification claims arise in the future, future payments by us could be significant and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations in a particular period. Lease Commitments Rental expense was $. million in , $. million in and $. million in . As of September, , minimum future rental commitments under operating leases having noncancelable lease terms in excess of one year are payable as follows (in millions): $ . . . . . Beyond . Total $ . Commitments from third parties under sublease agreements having noncancelable lease terms in excess of one year were not significant as of September, . Most leases contain renewal options for varying periods, and certain leases include options to purchase the leased property. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Business Segment Information Rockwell Automation, a leader in industrial automation and information, makes its customers more productive and the world more sustainable . We determine our operating segments based on the information used by our chief operating decision maker, our Chief Executive Officer, to allocate resources and assess performance. Based upon this information, we organize our hardware and software products, solutions and services into two operating segments: Architecture Software and Control Products Solutions. Architecture Software The Architecture Software segment contains all of the hardware, software and communication components of our integrated control and information architecture which are capable of controlling the customers industrial processes and connecting with their business enterprise. Architecture Software has a broad portfolio of hardware and software products including: Control platforms that perform multiple control disciplines and monitoring of applications, including discrete, batch and continuous process, drives control, motion control and machine safety control. Our platform products include controllers, electronic operator interface devices, electronic input/output devices, communication and networking products and industrial computers. The information-enabled Logix controllers provide integrated multi-discipline control that is modular and scalable. Software products that include configuration and visualization software used to operate and supervise control platforms, advanced process control software, manufacturing execution systems (MES) and information solutions softwarethat enables customers to improve operational productivity and meet regulatory requirements. Other products, including sensors, machine safety components and linear motion control products. Control Products Solutions The Control Products Solutions segment combines a comprehensive portfolio of intelligent motor control and industrial control products, application expertise and project management capabilities. This comprehensive portfolio includes: Low and medium voltage electro-mechanical and electronic motor starters, motor and circuit protection devices, AC/DC variable frequency drives, push buttons, signaling devices, termination and protection devices, relays and timers. Value-added solutions ranging from packaged solutions such as configured drives and motor control centers to automation and information solutions where we provide design, integration and start-up services for custom-engineered hardware and software. Services designed to help maximize a customers automation investment and provide total life-cycle support, including technical support and repair, asset management, training, predictive and preventative maintenance, and safety and network consulting. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Business Segment Information (Continued) The following tables reflect the sales and operating results of our reportable segments (in millions): Sales: Architecture Software $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Control Products Solutions ,. ,. ,. Total $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Segment operating earnings: Architecture Software $ . $ . $ . Control Products Solutions . . . Total ,. ,. ,. Purchase accounting depreciation and amortization (. ) (. ) (. ) General corporate-net (. ) (. ) (. ) Non-operating pension costs (. ) (. ) (. ) Gain on sale of business . Costs related to unsolicited Emerson proposals (. ) Gain on investments . Valuation adjustment pending registration of PTC Shares (. ) Interest expense (. ) (. ) (. ) Income before income taxes $ ,. $ ,. $ . Among other considerations, we evaluate performance and allocate resources based upon segment operating earnings before income taxes, costs related to the unsolicited Emerson proposals in the first quarter of fiscal , interest expense, costs related to corporate offices, non-operating pension costs, certain corporate initiatives, gains and losses on investments, valuation adjustment pending registration of PTC Shares, gains and losses from the disposition of businesses and purchase accounting depreciation and amortization. Depending on the product, intersegment sales within a single legal entity are either at cost or cost plus a mark-up, which does not necessarily represent a market price. Sales between legal entities are at an appropriate transfer price. We allocate costs related to shared segment operating activities to the segments using a methodology consistent with the expected benefit. The following tables summarize the identifiable assets at September , , and and the provision for depreciation and amortization and the amount of capital expenditures for property for the years then ended for each of the reportable segments and Corporate (in millions): Identifiable assets: Architecture Software $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Control Products Solutions ,. ,. ,. Corporate ,. ,. ,. Total $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Depreciation and amortization: Architecture Software $ . $ . $ . Control Products Solutions . . . Corporate . . . Total . . . Purchase accounting depreciation and amortization . . . Total $ . $ . $ . Capital expenditures for property: Architecture Software $ . $ . $ . Control Products Solutions . . . Corporate . . . Total $ . $ . $ . Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Business Segment Information (Continued) Identifiable assets at Corporate consist principally of cash, net deferred income tax assets, prepaid pension and property. Property shared by the segments and used in operating activities is also reported in Corporate identifiable assets and Corporate capital expenditures. Corporate identifiable assets include shared net property balances of $. million , $. million and $. million at September, , and , respectively, for which depreciation expense has been allocated to segment operating earnings based on the expected benefit to be realized by each segment. Corporate capital expenditures include $. million , $. million and $. million in , and , respectively, that will be shared by our operating segments. We conduct a significant portion of our business activities outside the United States. The following tables present sales and property by geographic region (in millions): Sales Property United States $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ . $ . $ . Canada . . . . . . Europe, Middle East and Africa ,. ,. ,. . . . Asia Pacific . . . . . . Latin America . . . . . . Total $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ . $ . $ . We attribute sales to the geographic regions based on the country of destination. In most countries, we sell primarily through independent distributors in conjunction with our direct sales force. In other countries, we sell through a combination of our direct sales force and to a lesser extent, through independent distributors. We sell large systems and service offerings principally through our direct sales force, though opportunities are sometimes identified through distributors. Sales to our largest distributor in , and , which are attributable to both segments, were approximately percent of our total sales. Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) . Quarterly Financial Information (Unaudited) Quarters (in millions, except per share amounts) First Second Third Fourth Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Gross profit . . . . ,. Income before income taxes . . . . ,. Net (loss) income (. ) . . . . (Loss) Earnings per share: Basic (. ) . . . . Diluted (. ) . . . . Quarters (in millions, except per share amounts) First Second Third Fourth Sales $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. $ ,. Gross profit . . . . ,. Income before income taxes . . . . ,. Net income . . . . . Earnings per share: Basic . . . . . Diluted . . . . . Note: The sum of the quarterly per share amounts will not necessarily equal the annual per share amounts presented. . Rocky Flats Settlement From to , Rockwell International Corporation (RIC) operated the Rocky Flats facility in Colorado for the U.S. Department of Energy (DoE). In , a class of landowners near Rocky Flats sued RIC and Dow Chemical, another former operator of the facility. In May , the parties agreed to settle this case and the DoE authorized the settlement. Under the court approved settlement agreement, we and Dow Chemical agreed to pay $. million in the aggregate to resolve the claims. Under RICs contract with the DoE and federal law, RIC was entitled to indemnification by the DoE for its portion of the settlement amount, which was $. million . When RIC was acquired by Boeing in , we agreed to indemnify Boeing for RICs liabilities related to Rocky Flats and received the benefits of RICs corresponding indemnity rights against the DoE. Pursuant to the settlement agreement, in fiscal , RIC paid an initial amount of $. million to the plaintiff class escrow fund. In January , the DoE fulfilled its indemnification obligation by paying $. million , and the full amount of RIC's obligation under the settlement agreement has now been transferred to the plaintiff class escrow fund. As a result, we were not required to make any payment under the settlement agreement. REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM To the Board of Directors and Shareowners of Rockwell Automation, Inc. Milwaukee, Wisconsin Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Rockwell Automation, Inc. and subsidiaries (the Company) as of September, and , and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, cash flows, and shareowners equity for each of the three years in the period ended September, , and the related notes and schedule listed in the Index at Item (a)() (collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). We also have audited the Companys internal control over financial reporting as of September, , based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework () issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of September, and , and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended September, , in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also, in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of September, , based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework () issued by COSO . Basis for Opinions The Companys management is responsible for these financial statements and financial statement schedule, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Managements Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements and financial statement schedule and an opinion on the Companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures to respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions. Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting A companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that ()pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; ()provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and ()provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. /s/ DELOITTE TOUCHE LLP Milwaukee, Wisconsin November, We have served as the Company's auditor since . Table of Contents Item. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure None. ItemA. Controls and Procedures Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, we have evaluated the effectiveness, as of September, , of our disclosure controls and procedures, as defined in Rulea-(e) and Rule d-(e) under the Exchange Act. Based on that evaluation, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of September, . Managements Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting We are responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as defined in Rulea-(f) under the Exchange Act. Our internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of our financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, we evaluated the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in Internal Control Integrated Framework () issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). Based on that evaluation, management has concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of September, . The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting, as of September, , has been audited by Deloitte Touche LLP, as stated in their report that is included on the previous two pages. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of the changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting There has not been any change in our internal control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in Rule a-(f)) under the Exchange Act during the fiscal quarter to which this report relates that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. The Company adopted the new revenue recognition standard on October , . The adoption of this guidance required additional functionality within our enterprise-wide information technology system in addition to new accounting processes, policies and procedures. The Company also implemented new internal controls for revenue recognition, including the adjustments to retained earnings required under the modified retrospective method of adoption and the related disclosures required under the new guidance. ItemB. Other Information None. Table of Contents PART III Item. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance Other than the information below, the information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled Election of Directors and Stock Ownership Information in the Proxy Statement. No nominee for director was selected pursuant to any arrangement or understanding between the nominee and any person other than the Company pursuant to which such person is or was to be selected as a director or nominee. See also the information about executive officers of the Company under ItemA of PartI. We have adopted a code of ethics that applies to our executive officers, including the principal executive officer, principal financial officer and principal accounting officer. A copy of our Code of Conduct is posted on our Internet site at https://www.rockwellautomation.com under the Investors link. In the event that we amend or grant any waiver from a provision of the code of ethics that applies to the principal executive officer, principal financial officer or principal accounting officer and that requires disclosure under applicable SEC rules, we intend to disclose such amendment or waiver and the reasons therefor on our Internet site. Item. Executive Compensation The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled Executive Compensation , Election of Directors, and Compensation Committee Report in the Proxy Statement. Item. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters Other than the information below, the information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled Stock Ownership Information in the Proxy Statement. The following table provides information, as of September, , about our common stock that may be issued upon the exercise of options, warrants and rights granted to employees, consultants or directors under all of our existing equity compensation plans, including our Long-Term Incentives Plan, Long-Term Incentives Plan, and Directors Stock Plan. Number of Securities to be issued upon Exercise of Outstanding Options, Warrants and Rights Weighted Average Exercise Price of Outstanding Options, Warrants and Rights Number of Securities Remaining Available for Future Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans (excluding Securities reflected in Column (a)) Plan Category (a) (b) (c) Equity compensation plans approved by shareowners ,, () $ . () ,, () Equity compensation plans not approved by shareowners n/a Total ,, $ . ,, () Represents outstanding options and shares issuable in payment of outstanding performance shares (at maximum payout) and restricted stock units under our Long-Term Incentives Plan, Long-Term Incentives Plan, and Directors Stock Plan. () Represents the weighted average exercise price of outstanding options and does not take into account the performance shares and restricted units. () Represents ,, and , shares available for future issuance under our Long-Term Incentives Plan and our Directors Stock Plan, respectively. Table of Contents Item. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled Election of Directors in the Proxy Statement. Item. Principal Accountant Fees and Services The information required by this Item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled Audit Matters in the Proxy Statement. Table of Contents PART IV Item. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule (a)Financial Statements, Financial Statement Schedule and Exhibits () Financial Statements (all financial statements listed below are those of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries) Page Consolidated Balance Sheet, September, and Consolidated Statement of Operations, years ended September, , and Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income, years ended September, , and Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows, years ended September, , and Consolidated Statement of Shareowners Equity, years ended September, , and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm () Financial Statement Schedule for the years ended September, , and Page ScheduleIIValuation and Qualifying Accounts S- Schedules not filed herewith are omitted because of the absence of conditions under which they are required or because the information called for is shown in the consolidated financial statements or notes thereto. () Exhibits -a Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Company, filed as Exhibit to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended March, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -b By-Laws of the Company, as amended and restated effective June , , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated June , , are hereby incorporated by reference. -a- Indenture dated as of December, between the Company and The Bank of New York Trust Company, N.A. (formerly JPMorgan Chase, successor to The Chase Manhattan Bank, successor to Mellon Bank, N.A.), as Trustee, filed as Exhibit -a to Registration Statement No.-, is hereby incorporated by reference. -a- Form of certificate for the Companys .% Debentures due January, , filed as Exhibit-b to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated January, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -a- Form of certificate for the Companys .% Debentures due January, , filed as Exhibit-c to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated January, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -a- Form of certificate for the Companys .% Debentures due December , , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -a- Form of certificate for the Companys .% Notes due March , , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated February , , is hereby incorporated by reference. -a- Form of certificate for the Companys .% Notes due March , , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated February , , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-a- Copy of the Companys Directors Stock Plan, filed as Exhibit-d to the Companys Registration Statement on FormS- (No.-), is hereby incorporated by reference. *-a- Memorandum of Amendments to the Companys Directors Stock Plan approved and adopted by the Board of Directors of the Company on April, , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended June, , is hereby incorporated by reference. Table of Contents *-a- Memorandum of Amendments to the Companys Directors Stock Plan approved and adopted by the Board of Directors of the Company on November, , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-a- Memorandum of Amendments to the Companys Directors Stock Plan approved and adopted by the Board of Directors of the Company on September, , filed as Exhibit-b- to the Companys Annual Report on Form-K for the year ended September, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-a- Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement under Section of the Companys Directors Stock Plan, as amended, filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended March, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-a- Copy of the Companys Directors Deferred Compensation Plan approved and adopted by the Board of Directors of the Company on November, , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-a- Summary of Non-Employee Director Compensation and Benefits as of October, , filed as Exhibit . to the Company's Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended June , , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Copy of the Companys Long-Term Incentives Plan, as amended and restated through June, , filed as Exhibit to the Companys Current Report on Form -K dated June, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Form of Stock Option Agreement under the Companys Long-Term Incentives Plan, filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended June, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Forms of Stock Option Agreement under the Companys Long-Term Incentives Plan for options granted to executive officers of the Company after December, , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Form of Stock Option Agreement under the Companys Long-Term Incentives Plan, as amended, for options granted to executive officers of the Company after December, , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Form of Stock Option Agreement under the Companys Long-Term Incentives Plan, as amended, for options granted to executive officers of the Company after November , , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Copy of the Company's Long-Term Incentives Plan, as amended and restated through February , , filed as Exhibit -c to the Company's Registration Statement on Form S- (No. -), is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Form of Stock Option Agreement under the Company's Long-Term Incentives Plan for options granted to executive officers of the Company after December , , filed as Exhibit . to the Company's Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended December , , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Form of Restricted Stock Agreement under the Company's Long-Term Incentives Plan for shares of restricted stock awarded to executive officers of the Company after December , , filed as Exhibit . to the Company's Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended December , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-b- Form of Performance Share Agreement under the Company's Long-Term Incentives Plan for performance shares awarded to executive officers of the Company after December , , filed as Exhibit . to the Company's Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended December , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-c- Copy of the Companys Deferred Compensation Plan, as amended and restated September, , filed as Exhibit-f to the Companys Annual Report on Form -K for the year ended September, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-c- Memorandum of Proposed Amendment and Restatement of the Companys Deferred Compensation Plan approved and adopted by the Board of Directors of the Company on November, , filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-d- Copy of the Companys Annual Incentive Compensation Plan for Senior Executive Officers, as amended December, , filed as Exhibit-i- to the Companys Annual Report for the year ended September, , is hereby incorporated by reference. Table of Contents *-d- Copy of the Companys Incentive Compensation Plan, filed as Exhibit to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated September, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-e- Change of Control Agreement dated as of September, between the Company and Blake D. Moret, filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated October , , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-e- Form of Change of Control Agreement between the Company and each of Patrick P. Goris, Theodore D. Crandall, Frank C. Kulaszewicz, John P. McDermott and Sujeet Chand and certain other corporate officers filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated October , , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-e- Letter Agreement dated September, between the Company and Keith D. Nosbusch, filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated September, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-e- Letter Agreement dated September, between Registrant and Theodore D. Crandall, filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated September, , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-e- Letter Agreement dated July , between Registrant and Blake D. Moret, filed as Exhibit . to the Company's Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended June , , is hereby incorporated by reference. *-e- Letter Agreement dated February , between Registrant and Patrick P. Goris, filed as Exhibit to the Company's Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended March , , is hereby incorporated by reference. -f- Agreement and Plan of Distribution dated as of December, , among Rockwell International Corporation (renamed Boeing North American, Inc.), the Company (formerly named New Rockwell International Corporation), Allen-Bradley Company, Inc., Rockwell Collins, Inc., Rockwell Semiconductor Systems, Inc., Rockwell Light Vehicle Systems, Inc. and Rockwell Heavy Vehicle Systems, Inc., filed as Exhibit l-b to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended December , , is hereby incorporated by reference. -f- Post-Closing Covenants Agreement dated as of December, , among Rockwell International Corporation (renamed Boeing North American, Inc.), The Boeing Company, Boeing NA, Inc. and the Company (formerly named New Rockwell International Corporation), filed as Exhibit-c to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -f- Tax Allocation Agreement dated as of December, , among Rockwell International Corporation (renamed Boeing North American, Inc.), the Company (formerly named New Rockwell International Corporation) and The Boeing Company, filed as Exhibit-d to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended December, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -g-l Distribution Agreement dated as of September, by and between the Company and Meritor Automotive, Inc., filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated October, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -g- Employee Matters Agreement dated as of September, by and between the Company and Meritor Automotive, Inc., filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated October, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -g- Tax Allocation Agreement dated as of September, by and between the Company and Meritor Automotive, Inc., filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated October, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -h- Distribution Agreement dated as of December, by and between the Company and Conexant Systems, Inc., filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated January, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -h- Amended and Restated Employee Matters Agreement dated as of December, by and between the Company and Conexant Systems, Inc., filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated January, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -h- Tax Allocation Agreement dated as of December, by and between the Company and Conexant Systems, Inc., filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated January, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -i- Distribution Agreement dated as of June, by and among the Company, Rockwell Collins, Inc. and Rockwell Scientific Company LLC, filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated July, , is hereby incorporated by reference. Table of Contents -i- Employee Matters Agreement dated as of June, by and among the Company, Rockwell Collins, Inc. and Rockwell Scientific Company LLC, filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated July, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -i- Tax Allocation Agreement dated as of June, by and between the Company and Rockwell Collins, Inc., filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated July, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -j- $,,, Five-Year Credit Agreement dated as of March , among the Company, the Banks listed on the signature pages thereof, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent, Bank of America, N.A. and Goldman Sachs Bank USA, as Syndication Agents, and The Bank of New York Mellon, BMO Harris Bank N.A., Citibank, N.A., Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., The Northern Trust Company, PNC Bank National Association, U.S. Bank National Association, and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Documentation Agents, filed as Exhibit to the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated March , , is hereby incorporated by reference. -j- First Amendment to Five-Year Credit Agreement dated as of December , among the Company, the Banks signatory thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, as Administrative Agent, filed as Exhibit to the Company's Quarterly Report on Form -Q for the quarter ended December , , is hereby incorporated by reference. -k Purchase and Sale Agreement dated as of August, by and between the Company and First Industrial Acquisitions, Inc., including the form of Lease Agreement attached as ExhibitI thereto, together with the First Amendment to Purchase and Sale Agreement dated as of September, and the Second Amendment to Purchase and Sale Agreement dated as of October, , filed as Exhibit-p to the Companys Annual Report on Form-K for the year ended September, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -l- Purchase Agreement, dated as of November, , by and among Rockwell Automation, Inc., Rockwell Automation of Ohio, Inc., Rockwell Automation Canada Control Systems, Grupo Industrias Reliance S.A. de C.V., Rockwell Automation GmbH (formerly known as Rockwell International GmbH) and Baldor Electric Company, contained in the Companys Current Report on Form-K dated November, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -l- First Amendment to Purchase Agreement dated as of January, by and among Rockwell Automation, Inc., Rockwell Automation of Ohio, Inc., Rockwell Automation Canada Control Systems, Grupo Industrias Reliance S.A. de C.V., Rockwell Automation GmbH and Baldor Electric Company, filed as Exhibit. to the Companys Quarterly Report on Form-Q for the quarter ended March, , is hereby incorporated by reference. -m- Securities Purchase Agreement, dated June , , between the Company and PTC Inc., filed as Exhibit . to the Company's Current Report on Form -K dated June , , is hereby incorporated by reference. -m- Registration Rights Agreement dated July , , between the Company and PTC Inc., filed as Exhibit . to the Company's Current Report on Form -K dated as July , , is hereby incorporated by reference. List of Subsidiaries of the Company. Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm. Powers of Attorney authorizing certain persons to sign this Annual Report on Form-K on behalf of certain directors and officers of the Company. . Certification of Periodic Report by the Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Rulea-(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of . . Certification of Periodic Report by the Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Rulea-(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of . . Certification of Periodic Report by the Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of . . Certification of Periodic Report by the Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of . Interactive Data Files. _________________________ * Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement. Item . Form -K Summary None. Table of Contents SIGNATURES Pursuant to the requirements of Section or (d) of the Securities Exchange Act of , the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. ROCKWELL AUTOMATION, INC. By /s/ PATRICK P. GORIS Patrick P. Goris Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer Dated: November, Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of , this report has been signed below on the th day of November by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated. By /s/ P ATRICK P. G ORIS Patrick P. Goris Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer) By /s/ D AVID M. D ORGAN David M. Dorgan Vice President and Controller (Principal Accounting Officer) Blake D. Moret* Chairman of the Board, President and Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer) and Director Keith D. Nosbusch* Director J. Phillip Holloman* Director Steven R. Kalmanson* Director James P. Keane* Director Lawrence D. Kingsley* Director William T. McCormick, Jr.* Director Donald R. Parfet * Director Lisa A. Payne* Director Thomas W. Rosamilia* Director Patricia A. Watson* Director *By /s/ R EBECCA W. H OUSE Rebecca W. House, Attorney-in-fact** **By authority of powers of attorney filed herewith Table of Contents SCHEDULE II ROCKWELL AUTOMATION, INC. VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS For the Years Ended September, , and Additions (in millions) Balance at Beginning of Year Charged to Costs and Expenses Charged to Other Accounts Deductions(b) Balance at End of Year Description *Year ended September, Allowance for doubtful accounts (a) $ . $ . $ $ . $ . Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets . . . . *Year ended September, Allowance for doubtful accounts (a) $ . $ . $ $ . $ . Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets . . . . . *Year ended September, Allowance for doubtful accounts (a) $ . $ . $ $ . $ . Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets . . . . . (a) Includes allowances for current and other long-term receivables. (b) Consists of amounts written off for the allowance for doubtful accounts and adjustments resulting from our ability to utilize foreign tax credits, capital losses, or net operating loss carryforwards for which a valuation allowance had previously been recorded. * Amounts reported relate to continuing operations in all periods presented. Table of Contents INDEX TO EXHIBITS* Exhibit No. Exhibit List of Subsidiaries of the Company. Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm. Powers of Attorney authorizing certain persons to sign this Annual Report on Form-K on behalf of certain directors and officers of the Company. . Certification of Periodic Report by the Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Rulea-(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of . . Certification of Periodic Report by the Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Rulea-(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of . . Certification of Periodic Report by the Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of . . Certification of Periodic Report by the Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of . Interactive Data Files. * See PartIV, Item(a)() for exhibits incorporated by reference. 
 
 
